Thank you, Phoenix. I am so glad to be back in Arizona, a state that has a very special place in my heart. I love the people of Arizona and, together, we are going to win the White House in November. Tonight is not going to be a normal rally speech. Instead, I am going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today: immigration. I have just landed having returned from a very important and special meeting with the President of Mexico – a man I like and respect very much, and a man who truly loves his country. Just like I am a man who loves the United States. We agreed on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs, cash, guns and people across our border, and to put the cartels out of business. We also discussed the great contributions of Mexican-American citizens to our two countries, my love for the people of Mexico, and the close friendship between our two nations. It was a thoughtful and substantive conversation. This is the first of what I expect will be many conversations in a Trump Administration about creating a new relationship between our two countries. But to fix our immigration system, we must change our leadership in Washington. There is no other way. The truth is, our immigration system is worse than anyone realizes. But the facts aren’t known because the media won’t report on them, the politicians won’t talk about them, and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up. Today you will get the truth. The fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors, political activists and powerful politicians. Let me tell you who it doesn’t serve: it doesn’t serve you, the American people. When politicians talk about immigration reform, they usually mean the following: amnesty, open borders, and lower wages. Immigration reform should mean something else entirely: it should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for American citizens. But if we are going to make our immigration system work, then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and sensitive issues. For instance, we have to listen to the concerns that working people have over the record pace of immigration and its impact on their jobs, wages, housing, schools, tax bills, and living conditions. These are valid concerns, expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds. We also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate. It is our right as a sovereign nation to choose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish here. Then there is the issue of security. Countless innocent American lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws. I have met with many of the parents who lost their children to Sanctuary Cities and open borders. They will be joining me on the stage later today. Countless Americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this Administration. This includes incredible Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root. The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody, and then was released into a U.S. community under the policies of this White House. He was released again after the crime, and is now at large. Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top of her class, the day before. Also among the victims of the Obama-Clinton open borders policies was Grant Ronnebeck, a 21 year-old convenience store clerk in Mesa, Arizona. He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary who had also been released from Federal Custody. Another victim is Kate Steinle, gunned down in the Sanctuary City of San Francisco by an illegal immigrant deported five previous times. Then there is the case of 90 year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home. The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records who did not meet the Obama Administration’s priorities for removal. In California, a 64 year-old Air Force Veteran, Marilyn Pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer. Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions, but was never deported. A 2011 report from the Government Accountability Office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens in our prisons and jails together had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names. On top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion dollars a year. For the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next ten years, we could provide one million at-risk students with a school voucher. While there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people, this doesn’t change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower-skilled workers with less education who compete directly against vulnerable American workers, and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they will ever pay in. But these facts are never reported. Instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing, and only this one thing: the needs of people living here illegally. The truth is, the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants – or however many there may be. That has never been the central issue. It will never be the central issue. Anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in Washington. Only out of touch media elites think the biggest problem facing American society today is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who don’t have legal status. To all the politicians, donors and special interests, hear these words from me today: there is only one core issue in the immigration debate and it is this: the well-being of the American people. Nothing even comes a close second. Hillary Clinton, for instance, talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated. But she’s not talking about the American families who have been permanently separated from their loved ones because of a preventable death. No, she’s only talking about families who came here in violation of the law. We will treat everyone living or residing in our country with dignity. We will be fair, just and compassionate to all. But our greatest compassion must be for American citizens. President Obama and Hillary Clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty by surrendering the safety of the American people to open borders. President Obama and Hillary Clinton support Sanctuary Cities, they support catch-and-release on the border, they support visa overstays, they support the release of dangerous criminals from detention – and they support unconstitutional executive amnesty. Hillary Clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, and her plan will provide Obamacare, Social Security and Medicare for illegal immigrants – breaking the federal budget. On top of that, she promises uncontrolled low-skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for American workers, especially African-American and Hispanic workers. This includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees in a four-year term. Now that you’ve heard about Hillary Clinton’s plan – about which she has not answered a single substantive question – let me tell you about my plan. While Hillary Clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists, my plan was crafted with the input from federal immigration officers, along with top immigration experts who represent workers, not corporations. I also worked with lawmakers who’ve led on this issue on behalf of American citizens for many years, and most importantly, I’ve met with the people directly impacted by these policies. Number One: We will build a wall along the Southern Border. On day one, we will begin working on an impenetrable physical wall on the southern border. We will use the best technology, including above-and below-ground sensors, towers, aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels, and keep out the criminal cartels, and Mexico will pay for the wall. Number Two: End Catch-And-Release Under my Administration, anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country. Number Three: Zero tolerance for criminal aliens. According to federal data, there are at least 2 million criminal aliens now inside the country. We will begin moving them out day one, in joint operations with local, state and federal law enforcement. Beyond the 2 million, there are a vast number of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled or evaded justice. But their days on the run will soon be over. They go out, and they go out fast. Moving forward, we will issue detainers for all illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings. We will terminate the Obama Administration’s deadly non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets. Since 2013 alone, the Obama Administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into U.S. communities – these are individuals encountered or identified by ICE but who not detained or processed for deportation. My plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens. We will restore the highly successful Secure Communities program. We will expand and revitalize the popular 287(g) partnerships, which will help to identify hundreds of thousands of deportable aliens in local jails. Both of these programs have been recklessly gutted by this Administration. This is yet one more area where we are headed in a totally opposite direction. On my first day in office, I am also going to ask Congress to pass “Kate’s Law” – named for Kate Steinle – to ensure that criminal aliens convicted of illegal reentry face receive strong mandatory minimum sentences. Another reform I am proposing is the passage of legislation named for Detective Michael Davis and Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver, two law enforcement officers recently killed by a previously-deported illegal immigrant. The Davis-Oliver bill will enhance cooperation with state and local authorities to ensure that criminal immigrants and terrorists are swiftly identified and removed. We are going to triple the number of ICE deportation officers. Within ICE, I am going to create a new special Deportation Task Force, focused on identifying and removing quickly the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in America who have evaded justice. The local police know who every one of these criminals are. There’s no great mystery to it, they’ve put up with it for years. And now, finally, we will turn the tables and law enforcement will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess. We’re also going to hire 5,000 more Border Patrol agents, and put more of them on the border, instead of behind desks. We will expand the number of Border Patrol Stations. I’ve had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers, and I want to take a moment to thank them. The endorsement I’ve received from the Border Patrol officers means more to me than I can say. Number Four: Block Funding For Sanctuary Cities We will end the Sanctuary Cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths. Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars, and we will work with Congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities. Number Five: Cancel Unconstitutional Executive Orders & Enforce All Immigration Laws We will immediately terminate President Obama’s two illegal executive amnesties, in which he defied federal law and the constitution to give amnesty to approximately 5 million illegal immigrants. Hillary Clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs – including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the Supreme Court. Clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty. Clinton’s plan would trigger a Constitutional Crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before. In effect, she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of Congress in order to write her own laws from the Oval Office. In a Trump Administration, all immigration laws will be enforced. As with any law enforcement activity, we will set priorities. But, unlike this Administration, no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement – and ICE and Border Patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs. Anyone who has entered the United States illegally is subject to deportation – that is what it means to have laws and to have a country. Our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals, gang members, security threats, visa overstays, public charges – that is, those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net, along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who’ve come here under the current Administration. Number Six: We Are Going To Suspend The Issuance Of Visas To Any Place Where Adequate Screening Cannot Occur According to data provided to the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration and the National Interest, between 9/11 and the end of 2014, at least 380 foreign-born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the United States. The number is likely higher, but the Administration refuses to provide this information to Congress. As soon as I enter office, I am going to ask the Department of State, Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put into place. Countries from which immigration will be suspended would include places like Syria and Libya. For the price of resettling 1 refugee in the United States, 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region. Another reform involves new screening tests for all applicants that include an ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people. For instance, in the last five years, we’ve admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from Iraq and Afghanistan – in these two countries, according to Pew research, a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified. Applicants will be asked for their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities, attitudes on Radical Islam, and many other topics as part of the vetting procedure. Number Seven: We will ensure that other countries take their people back when we order them deported There are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they have been ordered to leave the United States, including large numbers of violent criminals. Due to a Supreme Court decision, if these violent offenders cannot be sent home, our law enforcement officers have to release them into U.S. communities. There are often terrible consequences, such as Casey Chadwick’s tragic death in Connecticut just last year. Yet, despite the existence of a law that commands the Secretary of State to stop issuing visas to these countries, Secretary Hillary Clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance. The result of her misconduct was the release of thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home. According to a report from the Boston Globe, from the year 2008 through 2014, nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into U.S. communities because their home countries would not take them back. Many of these 13,000 releases occurred on Hillary Clinton’s watch – she had the power and the duty to stop it cold and she didn’t do it. Those released include individuals convicted of killings, sexual assault and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable, who went on to reoffend at a very high rate. Number Eight: We will finally complete the biometric entry-exit visa tracking system. For years, Congress has required a biometric entry-exit visa tracking system, but it has never been completed. In my Administration, we will ensure that this system is in place at all land, air, and sea ports. Approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary visas and then never left. Beyond violating our laws, visa overstays pose a substantial threat to national security. The 9/11 Commission said that this tracking system should be a high priority and “would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in August and September 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the U.S. on expired visas.” Last year alone, nearly a half a million individuals overstayed their temporary visas. Removing visa overstays will be a top priority of my Administration. If people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary visa and never leave – the Obama-Clinton policy – then we have a completely open border. We must send the message that visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced. Number Nine: We will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet. We will ensure that E-Verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and will work with Congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country. Immigration law doesn’t exist just for the purpose of keeping out criminals. It exists to protect all aspects of American life – the worksite, the welfare office, the education system and much else. That is why immigration limits are established in the first place. If we only enforce the laws against crime, then we have an open border to the entire world. I will enforce all of our immigration laws. The same goes for government benefits. The Center for Immigration Studies estimates that 62 percent of households headed by illegal immigrants used some form of cash or non-cash welfare programs, like food stamps or housing assistance. This directly violates the federal public charge law designed to protect the U.S. treasury. Those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for removal. Number 10: We will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers We’ve admitted 59 million immigrants to the United States between 1965 and 2015. Many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country. But we now have an obligation to them, and to their children, to control future immigration – as we have following previous immigration waves – to ensure assimilation, integration and upward mobility. Within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records. The time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to our legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals: To keep immigration levels, measured by population share, within historical norms To select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in U.S. society, and their ability to be financially self-sufficient. We need a system that serves our needs – remember, it’s America First. To choose immigrants based on merit, skill and proficiency And to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to American workers first. We want people to come into our country, but they have to come in legally and properly-vetted, and in a manner that serves the national interest. We’ve been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago. To avoid this happening in the future, I believe we should sunset our visa laws so that Congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them. We wouldn’t put our entire federal budget on autopilot for decades, so why should we do the same for immigration? Let’s talk about the big picture These ten steps, if rigorously followed and enforced, will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last fifty years. Because I am not a politician, because I am not beholden to any special interest, I will get this done for you and your family. We will accomplish all of the steps outlined above, and when we do, peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail. Crime will go down, border crossings will plummet, gangs will disappear, and welfare use will decrease. We will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding America, beginning with our inner cities. For those here today illegally who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and only one route: to return home and apply for re-entry under the rules of the new legal immigration system that I have outlined above. Those who have left to seek entry under this new system will not be awarded surplus visas, but will have to enter under the immigration caps or limits that will be established. We will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration. There will be no amnesty. Our message to the world will be this: you cannot obtain legal status, or become a citizen of the United States, by illegally entering our country. This declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays. People will know that you can’t just smuggle in, hunker down, and wait to be legalized. Those days are over. In several years, when we have accomplished all of our enforcement goals – and truly ended illegal immigration for good, including the construction of a great wall, and the establishment of our new lawful immigration system – then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those who remain. That discussion can only take place in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time. Right now, however, we are in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis, and a terrorism crisis. All energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security. That is the only conversation we should be having at this time. Whether it’s dangerous materials being smuggled across the border, terrorists entering on visas, or Americans losing their jobs to foreign workers, these are the problems we must now focus on fixing – and the media needs to begin demanding to hear Hillary Clinton’s answer on how her policies will affect Americans and their security. These are matters of life-and-death for our country and its people, and we deserve answers from Hillary Clinton. What we do know, despite the total lack of media curiosity, is that Hillary Clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement. The result will be millions more illegal immigrants, thousands more violent crimes, and total chaos and lawlessness. This election is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration, and reform our laws to make your life better. This is it. We won’t get another opportunity – it will be too late. So I want to remind everyone what we are fighting for – and who we are fighting for. So I am going to ask all the Angel Moms to come join me on the stage right now. [[PAUSE FOR ANGEL MOMS – EACH SAYS THE NAME OF THEIR CHILD INTO THE MICROPHONE]] Now is the time for these voices to be heard. Now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf. Now is the time for all of us, as one country, Democrat and Republican, liberal and conservative, to band together to deliver justice and safety and security for all Americans. Let’s fix this problem. Let’s secure our border. Let’s stop the drugs and the crime. Let’s protect our Social Security and Medicare. And let’s get unemployed Americans off of welfare and back to work in their own country. Together, we can save American lives, American jobs, and American futures. Together, we can save America itself. Join me in this mission to Make America Great Again. Thank you, and God Bless you all!Friday 14 October 2016 18.32 BST View more sharing options This article is 1 month old Shares 25,926 My goodness! You guys are fired up! Well, let me just say hello everyone. I am so thrilled to be here with you all today in New Hampshire. This is like home to me, and this day – thank you for a beautiful fall day. You just ordered this day up for me, didn’t you? It’s great to be here. Let me start by thanking your fabulous governor, your next US senator, Maggie Hassan. I want to thank her for that lovely introduction. I also want to recognize your Congresswoman Annie McKlane Kuster, who’s a dear, dear friend. Your soon-to-be congresswoman once again, Carol Shea Porter – all of whom have been just terrific friends to us. And your executive council and candidate for governor, Colin Van Ostern. And, of course, thanks to all of you for taking the time to be here today. Audience member: We love you! Thanks so much. That’s very sweet of you. I love you guys too. I can’t believe it’s just a few weeks before election day, as we come together to support the next president and vice-president of the United States, Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine! And New Hampshire is going to be important, as always. So I’m going to get a little serious here, because I think we can all agree that this has been a rough week in an already rough election. This week has been particularly interesting for me personally because it has been a week of profound contrast. See, on Tuesday, at the White House, we celebrated the International Day of the Girl and Let Girls Learn, and it was a wonderful celebration. It was the last event that I’m going to be doing as first lady for Let Girls Learn. And I had the pleasure of spending hours talking to some of the most amazing young women you will ever meet, young girls here in the US and all around the world. And we talked about their hopes and their dreams. We talked about their aspirations. See, because many of these girls have faced unthinkable obstacles just to attend school, jeopardizing their personal safety, their freedom, risking the rejection of their families and communities. So I thought it would be important to remind these young women how valuable and precious they are. I wanted them to understand that the measure of any society is how it treats its women and girls. And I told them that they deserve to be treated with dignity and respect, and I told them that they should disregard anyone who demeans or devalues them, and that they should make their voices heard in the world. And I walked away feeling so inspired, just like I’m inspired by all the young people here – and I was so uplifted by these girls. That was Tuesday. And now, here I am, out on the campaign trail in an election where we have consistently been hearing hurtful, hateful language about women – language that has been painful for so many of us, not just as women, but as parents trying to protect our children and raise them to be caring, respectful adults, and as citizens who think that our nation’s leaders should meet basic standards of human decency. The fact is that in this election, we have a candidate for president of the United States who, over the course of his lifetime and the course of this campaign, has said things about women that are so shocking, so demeaning that I simply will not repeat anything here today. And last week, we saw this candidate actually bragging about sexually assaulting women. And I can’t believe that I’m saying that a candidate for president of the United States has bragged about sexually assaulting women. And I have to tell you that I can’t stop thinking about this. It has shaken me to my core in a way that I couldn’t have predicted. So while I’d love nothing more than to pretend like this isn’t happening, and to come out here and do my normal campaign speech, it would be dishonest and disingenuous of me to just move on to the next thing like this was all just a bad dream. This is not something that we can ignore. It’s not something we can just sweep under the rug as just another disturbing footnote in a sad election season. Because this was not just a “lewd conversation”. This wasn’t just locker-room banter. This was a powerful individual speaking freely and openly about sexually predatory behavior, and actually bragging about kissing and groping women, using language so obscene that many of us were worried about our children hearing it when we turn on the TV. And to make matters worse, it now seems very clear that this isn’t an isolated incident. It’s one of countless examples of how he has treated women his whole life. And I have to tell you that I listen to all of this and I feel it so personally, and I’m sure that many of you do too, particularly the women. The shameful comments about our bodies. The disrespect of our ambitions and intellect. The belief that you can do anything you want to a woman. It is cruel. It’s frightening. And the truth is, it hurts. It hurts. It’s like that sick, sinking feeling you get when you’re walking down the street minding your own business and some guy yells out vulgar words about your body. Or when you see that guy at work that stands just a little too close, stares a little too long, and makes you feel uncomfortable in your own skin. It’s that feeling of terror and violation that too many women have felt when someone has grabbed them, or forced himself on them and they’ve said no but he didn’t listen – something that we know happens on college campuses and countless other places every single day. It reminds us of stories we heard from our mothers and grandmothers about how, back in their day, the boss could say and do whatever he pleased to the women in the office, and even though they worked so hard, jumped over every hurdle to prove themselves, it was never enough. We thought all of that was ancient history, didn’t we? And so many have worked for so many years to end this kind of violence and abuse and disrespect, but here we are in 2016 and we’re hearing these exact same things every day on the campaign trail. We are drowning in it. And all of us are doing what women have always done: we’re trying to keep our heads above water, just trying to get through it, trying to pretend like this doesn’t really bother us maybe because we think that admitting how much it hurts makes us as women look weak. Maybe we’re afraid to be that vulnerable. Maybe we’ve grown accustomed to swallowing these emotions and staying quiet, because we’ve seen that people often won’t take our word over his. Or maybe we don’t want to believe that there are still people out there who think so little of us as women. Too many are treating this as just another day’s headline, as if our outrage is overblown or unwarranted, as if this is normal, just politics as usual. But, New Hampshire, be clear: this is not normal. This is not politics as usual. This is disgraceful. It is intolerable. And it doesn’t matter what party you belong to – Democrat, Republican, independent – no woman deserves to be treated this way. None of us deserves this kind of abuse. And I know it’s a campaign, but this isn’t about politics. It’s about basic human decency. It’s about right and wrong. And we simply cannot endure this, or expose our children to this any – not for another minute, and let alone for four years. Now is the time for all of us to stand up and say enough is enough. This has got to stop right now. Because consider this: if all of this is painful to us as grown women, what do you think this is doing to our children? What message are our little girls hearing about who they should look like, how they should act? What lessons are they learning about their value as professionals, as human beings, about their dreams and aspirations? And how is this affecting men and boys in this country? Because I can tell you that the men in my life do not talk about women like this. And I know that my family is not unusual. And to dismiss this as everyday locker-room talk is an insult to decent men everywhere. The men that you and I know don’t treat women this way. They are loving fathers who are sickened by the thought of their daughters being exposed to this kind of vicious language about women. They are husbands and brothers and sons who don’t tolerate women being treated and demeaned and disrespected. And like us, these men are worried about the impact this election is having on our boys who are looking for role models of what it means to be a man. In fact, someone recently told me a story about their six-year-old son who one day was watching the news – they were watching the news together. And the little boy, out of the blue, said, “I think Hillary Clinton will be president.” And his mom said, “Well, why do you say that?” And this little six-year-old said, “Because the other guy called someone a piggy and,” he said, “You cannot be president if you call someone a piggy.” So even a six-year-old knows better. A six-year-old knows that this is not how adults behave. This is not how decent human beings behave. And this is certainly not how someone who wants to be president of the United States behaves. Because let’s be very clear: strong men – men who are truly role models – don’t need to put down women to make themselves feel powerful. People who are truly strong lift others up. People who are truly powerful bring others together. And that is what we need in our next president. We need someone who is a uniting force in this country. We need someone who will heal the wounds that divide us, someone who truly cares about us and our children, someone with strength and compassion to lead this country forward. And let me tell you, I’m here today because I believe with all of my heart that Hillary Clinton will be that president. See, we know that Hillary is the right person for the job because we’ve seen her character and commitment not just in this campaign, but over the course of her entire life. The fact is that Hillary embodies so many of the values that we try so hard to teach our young people. We tell our young people “work hard in school, get a good education”. We encourage them to use that education to help others – which is exactly what Hillary did with her college and law degrees, advocating for kids with disabilities, fighting for children’s healthcare as first lady, affordable childcare in the Senate. We teach our kids the value of being a team player, which is what Hillary exemplified when she lost the 2008 election and actually agreed to work for her opponent as our secretary of state – earning sky-high approval ratings serving her country once again. We also teach our kids that you don’t take shortcuts in life, and you strive for meaningful success in whatever job you do. Well, Hillary has been a lawyer, a law professor, first lady of Arkansas, first lady of the United States, a US senator, secretary of state. And she has been successful in every role, gaining more experience and exposure to the presidency than any candidate in our lifetime – more than Barack, more than Bill. And, yes, she happens to be a woman. And finally, we teach our kids that when you hit challenges in life, you don’t give up, you stick with it. Well, during her four years as secretary of state alone, Hillary has faced her share of challenges. She’s traveled to 112 countries, negotiated a ceasefire, a peace agreement, a release of dissidents. She spent 11 hours testifying before a congressional committee. We know that when things get tough, Hillary doesn’t complain. She doesn’t blame others. She doesn’t abandon ship for something easier. No, Hillary Clinton has never quit on anything in her life. So in Hillary, we have a candidate who has dedicated her life to public service, someone who has waited her turn and helped out while waiting. She is an outstanding mother. She has raised a phenomenal young woman. She is a loving, loyal wife. She’s a devoted daughter who cared for her mother until her final days. And if any of us had raised a daughter like Hillary Clinton, we would be so proud. We would be proud. And regardless of who her opponent might be, no one could be more qualified for this job than Hillary – no one. And in this election, if we turn away from her, if we just stand by and allow her opponent to be elected, then what are we teaching our children about the values they should hold, about the kind of life they should lead? What are we saying? In our hearts, we all know that if we let Hillary’s opponent win this election, then we are sending a clear message to our kids that everything they’re seeing and hearing is perfectly OK. We are validating it. We are endorsing it. We’re telling our sons that it’s OK to humiliate women. We’re telling our daughters that this is how they deserve to be treated. We’re telling all our kids that bigotry and bullying are perfectly acceptable in the leader of their country. Is that what we want for our children? And remember, we won’t just be setting a bad example for our kids, but for our entire world. Because for so long, America has been a model for countries across the globe, pushing them to educate their girls, insisting that they give more rights to their women. But if we have a president who routinely degrades women, who brags about sexually assaulting women, then how can we maintain our moral authority in the world? How can we continue to be a beacon of freedom and justice and human dignity? Well, fortunately, New Hampshire, here’s the beauty: we have everything we need to stop this madness. You see, while our mothers and grandmothers were often powerless to change their circumstances, today, we as women have all the power we need to determine the outcome of this election. We have knowledge. We have a voice. We have a vote. And on November the 8th, we as women, we as Americans, we as decent human beings can come together and declare that enough is enough, and we do not tolerate this kind of behavior in this country. Remember this: in 2012, women’s votes were the difference between Barack winning and losing in key swing states, including right here in New Hampshire. So for anyone who might be thinking that your one vote doesn’t really matter, or that one person can’t really make a difference, consider this: back in 2012, Barack won New Hampshire by about 40,000 votes, which sounds like a lot. But when you break that number down, the difference between winning and losing this state was only 66 votes per precinct. Just take that in. If 66 people in each precinct had gone the other way, Barack would have lost. So each of you right here today could help swing an entire precinct and win this election for Hillary just by getting yourselves, your families, and your friends and neighbors out to vote. You can do it right here. But you could also help swing an entire precinct for Hillary’s opponent with a protest vote or by staying home out of frustration. Because here’s the truth: either Hillary Clinton or her opponent will be elected president this year. And if you vote for someone other than Hillary, or if you don’t vote at all, then you are helping to elect her opponent. And just think about how you will feel if that happens. Imagine waking up on November the 9th and looking into the eyes of your daughter or son, or looking into your own eyes as you stare into the mirror. Imagine how you’ll feel if you stayed home, or if you didn’t do everything possible to elect Hillary. We simply cannot let that happen. We cannot allow ourselves to be so disgusted that we just shut off the TV and walk away. And we can’t just sit around wringing our hands. Now, we need to recover from our shock and depression and do what women have always done in this country. We need you to roll up your sleeves. We need to get to work. Because remember this: When they go low, we go … Audience: High! Yes, we do. And voting ourselves is a great start, but we also have to step up and start organizing. So we need you to make calls and knock on doors and get folks to the polls on election day and sign up to volunteer with one of the Hillary campaign folks who are here today just waiting for you to step up. And, young people and not-so-young people, get on social media. Share your own story of why this election matters, why it should matter for all people of conscience in this country. There is so much at stake in this election. See, the choice you make November 8 could determine whether we have a president who treats people with respect – or not. A president who will fight for kids, for good schools, for good jobs for our families – or not. A president who thinks that women deserve the right to make our own choices about our bodies and our health – or not. That’s just a little bit of what’s at stake. So we cannot afford to be tired or turned off. And we cannot afford to stay home on election day. Because on November the 8th, we have the power to show our children that America’s greatness comes from recognizing the innate dignity and worth of all our people. On November the 8th, we can show our children that this country is big enough to have a place for us all – men and women, folks of every background and walk of life – and that each of us is a precious part of this great American story, and we are always stronger together. On November 8, we can show our children that here in America, we reject hatred and fear and in difficult times, we don’t discard our highest ideals. No, we rise up to meet them. We rise up to perfect our union. We rise up to defend our blessings of liberty. We rise up to embody the values of equality and opportunity and sacrifice that have always made this country the greatest nation on Earth. That is who we are. And don’t ever let anyone tell you differently. Hope is important. Hope is important for our young people. And we deserve a president who can see those truths in us – a president who can bring us together and bring out the very best in us. Hillary Clinton will be that president. So for the next 26 days, we need to do everything we can to help her and Tim Kaine win this election. I know I’m going to be doing it. Are you with me? Are you all with me? You ready to roll up your sleeves? Get to work knocking on doors? All right, let’s get to work. Thank you all. God bless. Election days come and go. But political and social revolutions that attempt to transform our society never end. They continue every day, every week and every month in the fight to create a nation of social and economic justice. That’s what the trade union movement is about. That’s what the civil rights movement is about. That’s what the women’s movement is about. That’s what the gay rights movement is about. That’s what the environmental movement is about. And that’s what this campaign has been about over the past year. That’s what the political revolution is about and that’s why the political revolution must continue into the future. Real change never takes place from the top down, or in the living rooms of wealthy campaign contributors. It always occurs from the bottom on up – when tens of millions of people say “enough is enough” and become engaged in the fight for justice. That’s what the political revolution we helped start is all about. That’s why the political revolution must continue. When we began this campaign a little over a year ago, we had no political organization, no money and very little name recognition. The media determined that we were a fringe campaign. Nobody thought we were going anywhere. Well, a lot has changed over a year. During this campaign, we won more than 12 million votes. We won 22 state primaries and caucuses. We came very close – within 2 points or less – in five more states. In other words, our vision for the future of this country is not some kind of fringe idea. It is not a radical idea. It is mainstream. It is what millions of Americans believe in and want to see happen. And something else extraordinarily important happened in this campaign that makes me very optimistic about the future of our country – something that, frankly, I had not anticipated. In virtually every state that we contested we won the overwhelming majority of the votes of people 45 years of age or younger, sometimes, may I say, by HUGE numbers. These are the people who are determined to SHAPE the future of this country. These are the people who ARE the future of this country. Together, in this campaign, 1.5 million people came out to our rallies and town meetings in almost every state in the country. Together, hundreds of thousands of volunteers made 75 million phone calls urging their fellow citizens into action. Together, our canvassers knocked on more than 5 million doors. Together, we hosted 74,000 meetings in every state and territory in this country. Together, 2.7 million people made over 8 million individual contributions to our campaign – more contributions at this point than any campaign in American history. Amazingly, the bulk of those contributions came from low-income and working people whose donations averaged $27 apiece. In an unprecedented way, we showed the world that we could run a strong national campaign without being dependent on the big-money interests whose greed has done so much to damage our country. And let me give a special thanks to the financial support we received from students struggling to repay their college loans, from seniors and disabled vets on Social Security, from workers earning starvation wages and even from people who were unemployed. In every single state that we contested we took on virtually the entire political establishment – U.S. senators, members of Congress, governors, mayors, state legislators and local party leaders. To those relatively few elected officials who had the courage to stand with us, I say thank you. We must continue working together into the future. This campaign has never been about any single candidate. It is always about transforming America. It is about ending a campaign finance system which is corrupt and allows billionaires to buy elections. It is about ending the grotesque level of wealth and income inequality that we are experiencing where almost all new wealth and income goes to the people on top, where the 20 wealthiest people own more wealth than the bottom 150 million. It is about creating an economy that works for all of us, not just the 1 percent. It is about ending the disgrace of native Americans who live on the Pine Ridge, South Dakota, reservation having a life expectancy lower than many third-world countries. It is about ending the incredible despair that exists in many parts of this country where – as a result of unemployment and low wages, suicide, drugs and alcohol – millions of Americans are now dying, in an ahistorical way, at a younger age than their parents. It is about ending the disgrace of having the highest level of childhood poverty of almost any major country on earth and having public school systems in inner cities that are totally failing our children – where kids now stand a greater chance of ending up in jail than ending up with a college degree. It is about ending the disgrace that millions of undocumented people in this country continue to live in fear and are exploited every day on their jobs because they have no legal rights. It is about ending the disgrace of tens of thousands of Americans dying every year from preventable deaths because they either lack health insurance, have high deductibles or cannot afford the outrageously high cost of the prescription drugs they need. It is about ending the disgrace of hundreds of thousands of bright young people unable to go to college because their families are poor or working class, while millions more struggle with suffocating levels of student debt. It is about ending the pain of a young single mother in Nevada, in tears, telling me that she doesn’t know how she and her daughter can make it on $10.45 an hour. And the reality that today millions of our fellow Americans are working at starvation wages. It is about ending the disgrace of a mother in Flynt, Michigan, telling me what has happened to the intellectual development of her child as a result of lead in the water in that city, of many thousands of homes in California and other communities unable to drink the polluted water that comes out of their faucets. In America. In the year 2016. In a nation whose infrastructure is crumbling before our eyes. It is about ending the disgrace that too many veterans still sleep out on the streets, that homelessness is increasing and that tens of millions of Americans, because of a lack of affordable housing, are paying 40, 50 percent or more of their limited incomes to put a roof over their heads. It is about ending the disgrace that, in a given year, corporations making billions in profit avoid paying a nickel in taxes because they stash their money in the Cayman Islands and other tax havens. This campaign is about defeating Donald Trump, the Republican candidate for president. After centuries of racism, sexism and discrimination of all forms in our country we do not need a major party candidate who makes bigotry the cornerstone of his campaign. We cannot have a president who insults Mexicans and Latinos, Muslims, women and African-Americans. We cannot have a president who, in the midst of so much income and wealth inequality, wants to give hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks to the very rich. We cannot have a president who, despite all of the scientific evidence, believes that climate change is a hoax. The major political task that we face in the next five months is to make certain that Donald Trump is defeated and defeated badly. And I personally intend to begin my role in that process in a very short period of time. But defeating Donald Trump cannot be our only goal. We must continue our grassroots efforts to create the America that we know we can become. And we must take that energy into the Democratic National Convention on July 25 in Philadelphia where we will have more than 1,900 delegates. I recently had the opportunity to meet with Secretary Clinton and discuss some of the very important issues facing our country and the Democratic Party. It is no secret that Secretary Clinton and I have strong disagreements on some very important issues. It is also true that our views are quite close on others. I look forward, in the coming weeks, to continued discussions between the two campaigns to make certain that your voices are heard and that the Democratic Party passes the most progressive platform in its history and that Democrats actually fight for that agenda. I also look forward to working with Secretary Clinton to transform the Democratic Party so that it becomes a party of working people and young people, and not just wealthy campaign contributors: a party that has the courage to take on Wall Street, the pharmaceutical industry, the fossil fuel industry and the other powerful special interests that dominate our political and economic life. As I have said throughout this campaign, the Democratic Party must support raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour, and create millions of jobs rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure. We must ensure that women will no longer make 79-cents on the dollar compared to men and that we fight for pay equity. We must fight to make certain that women throughout the country have the right to control their own bodies. We must protect the right of our gay brothers and sisters to marriage equality in every state America. As the recent tragedy in Orlando has made crystal clear, we must ban the sale and distribution of assault weapons, end the gun show loophole and expand instant background checks. We must defeat the Trans-Pacific Partnership and make certain that that bad trade deal does not get a vote in a lame-duck session of Congress. We must resist all efforts to cut Social Security and, in fact, expand benefits for our seniors and disabled veterans. We must understand that the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on Wall Street has to end, that we need to pass modern-day Glass-Steagall legislation and that we need to break up the biggest financial institutions in this country who not only remain too big to fail but who prevent the kind of vigorous competition that a healthy financial system requires. We must aggressively combat climate change and transform our energy system, move to energy efficiency and sustainable energy and impose a tax on carbon. It means that, in order to protect our water supply, we ban fracking. We must compete effectively in a global economy by making public colleges and universities tuition free and substantially reduce student debt. We must join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all people as a right and not a privilege. We must end the disgrace of having more people in jail than any other country on earth and move toward real criminal justice reform at the federal, state and local levels. We must pass comprehensive immigration reform and provide a path toward citizenship for 11 million undocumented people. We must take a hard look at the waste, cost overruns and inefficiencies in every branch of government –including the Department of Defense. And we must make certain our brave young men and women in the military are not thrown into perpetual warfare in the Middle East or other wars we should not be fighting. But the political revolution means much more than fighting for our ideals at the Democratic National Convention and defeating Donald Trump. It means that, at every level, we continue the fight to make our society a nation of economic, social, racial and environmental justice. It means that we can no longer ignore the fact that, sadly, the current Democratic Party leadership has turned its back on dozens of states in this country and has allowed right-wing politicians to win elections in some states with virtually no opposition – including some of the poorest states in America. The Democratic Party needs a 50-state strategy. We may not win in every state tomorrow but we will never win unless we recruit good candidates and develop organizations that can compete effectively in the future. We must provide resources to those states which have so long been ignored. Most importantly, the Democratic Party needs leadership which is prepared to open its doors and welcome into its ranks working people and young people. That is the energy that we need to transform the Democratic Party, take on the special interests and transform our country. Here is a cold, hard fact that must be addressed. Since 2009, some 900 legislative seats have been lost to Republicans in state after state throughout this country. In fact, the Republican Party now controls 31 state legislatures and controls both the governors’ mansions and statehouses in 23 states. That is unacceptable. We need to start engaging at the local and state level in an unprecedented way. Hundreds of thousands of volunteers helped us make political history during the last year. These are people deeply concerned about the future of our country and their own communities. Now we need many of them to start running for school boards, city councils, county commissions, state legislatures and governorships. State and local governments make enormously important decisions and we cannot allow right-wing Republicans to increasingly control them. I hope very much that many of you listening tonight are prepared to engage at that level. Pease go to my website at berniesanders.com/win to learn more about how you can effectively run for office or get involved in politics at the local or state level. I have no doubt that with the energy and enthusiasm our campaign has shown that we can win significant numbers of local and state elections if people are prepared to become involved. I also hope people will give serious thought to running for statewide offices and the U.S. Congress. And when we talk about transforming America, it is not just about elections. Many of my Republican colleagues believe that government is the enemy, that we need to eviscerate and privatize virtually all aspects of government – whether it is Social Security, Medicare, the VA, EPA, the Postal Service or public education. I strongly disagree. In a democratic civilized society, government must play an enormously important role in protecting all of us and our planet. But in order for government to work efficiently and effectively, we need to attract great and dedicated people from all walks of life. We need people who are dedicated to public service and can provide the services we need in a high quality and efficient way. When we talk about a Medicare-for-all health care program and the need to make sure all of our people have quality health care, it means that we need tens of thousands of new doctors, nurses, dentists, psychologists and other medical personnel who are prepared to practice in areas where people today lack access to that care. It means that we need hundreds of thousands of people to become childcare workers and teachers so that our young people will get the best education available in the world. It means that as we combat climate change and transform our energy system away from fossil fuels, we need scientists and engineers and entrepreneurs who will help us make energy efficiency, solar energy, wind energy, geothermal and other developing technologies as efficient and cost effective as possible. It means that as we rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, we need millions of skilled construction workers of all kinds. It means that when we talk about growing our economy and creating jobs, we need great business people who can produce and distribute the products and services we need in a way that respects their employees and the environment. In other words, we need a new generation of people actively involved in public service who are prepared to provide the quality of life the American people deserve. Let me conclude by once again thanking everyone who has helped in this campaign in one way or another. We have begun the long and arduous process of transforming America, a fight that will continue tomorrow, next week, next year and into the future. My hope is that when future historians look back and describe how our country moved forward into reversing the drift toward oligarchy, and created a government which represents all the people and not just the few, they will note that, to a significant degree, that effort began with the political revolution of 2016. Thank you very much. Good night. I just met with my National Security Council as part of our regular effort to review and intensify our campaign to destroy the terrorist group ISIL. Our meeting was planned before the terrible attack in Orlando. But obviously that tragedy -- the awful loss of life -- shaped much of our work today. In all of our efforts, foremost in our minds is the loss and the grief of the people of Orlando -- those who died, those who are still recovering, the families who have seen their loved ones harmed, the friends of ours who are lesbian and gay and bisexual and transgender who were targeted. I want to remind them that they are not alone. The American people, and our allies and friends all over the world, stand with you and are thinking about you, and are praying for you. As Director Comey has said, we currently do not have any information to indicate that a foreign terrorist group directed the attack in Orlando. It is increasingly clear, however, that the killer took in extremist information and propaganda over the Internet. He appears to have been an angry, disturbed, unstable young man who became radicalized. As we know all too well, terrorist groups like ISIL have called on people around the world and here in the United States to attack innocent civilians. Their propaganda, their videos, their postings are pervasive and more easily accessible than we want. This individual appears to have absorbed some of that. And during his killing spree, the shooter in Orlando pledged allegiance to ISIL. As I’ve said before, these lone actors or small cells of terrorists are very hard to detect and very hard to prevent. But across our government, at every level -- federal, state and local, military and civilian -- we are doing everything in our power to stop these kinds of attacks. We work to succeed a hundred percent of the time. An attacker, as we saw in Orlando, only has to succeed once. Our extraordinary personnel -- our intelligence, our military, our homeland security, our law enforcement -- have prevented many attacks and saved many lives. And we can never thank them enough. But we are all sobered by the fact that, despite the extraordinary hard work, something like Orlando can occur. In our meeting today, Director Comey updated us on the investigation in Orlando. Secretary Johnson reviewed the measures we continue to take on behalf of our homeland security. Secretary Carter and Chairman Dunford reviewed the military campaign against ISIL. And I want to thank Secretary Lew and his team here at Treasury for hosting us and for their tireless efforts to cut off the money that ISIL relies on to fund its terror network. At the outset, I want to reiterate our objective in this fight. Our mission is to destroy ISIL. Since I last updated the American people on our campaign two months ago, we’ve seen that this continues to be a difficult fight -- but we are making significant progress. Over the past two months, I’ve authorized a series of steps to ratchet up our fight against ISIL: additional U.S. personnel, including Special Forces, in Syria to assist local forces battling ISIL there; additional advisors to work more closely with Iraqi security forces, and additional assets, including attack helicopters; and additional support for local forces in northern Iraq. Our aircraft continue to launch from the USS Harry Truman, now in the Mediterranean. Our B-52 bombers are hitting ISIL with precision strikes. Targets are being identified and hit even more quickly -- so far, 13,000 airstrikes. This campaign at this stage is firing on all cylinders. And as a result, ISIL is under more pressure than ever before. ISIL continues to lose key leaders. This includes Salman Abd Shahib, a senior military leader in Mosul; Abu Sa’ad al-Sudani, who plotted external attacks; Shakir Wahayb, ISIL’s military leader in Iraq’s Anbar province; and Maher al-Bilawi, the top ISIL commander in Fallujah. So far, we’ve taken out more than 120 top ISIL leaders and commanders. And our message is clear: If you target America and our allies, you will not be safe. You will never be safe. ISIL continues to lose ground in Iraq. In the past two months, local forces in Iraq, with coalition support, have liberated the western town of Rutbah and have also pushed up the Euphrates River Valley, liberating the strategic town of Hit and breaking the ISIL siege of Haditha. Iraqi forces have surrounded Fallujah and begun to move into the city. Meanwhile, in the north, Iraqi forces continue to push up the Tigris River Valley, making gains around Makhmour, and now preparing to tighten the noose around ISIL in Mosul. All told, ISIL has now lost nearly half of the populated territory that it once controlled in Iraq -- and it will lose more. ISIL continues to lose ground in Syria as well. Assisted by our Special Operations Forces, a coalition of local forces is now pressuring the key town of Manbij, which means the noose is tightening around ISIL in Raqqa as well. In short, our coalition continues to be on offense. ISIL is on defense. And it’s now been a full year since ISIL has been able to mount a major successful offensive operation in either Syria or Iraq. As ISIL continues to lose territory, it also continues to lose the money that is its lifeblood. As a result of our strikes against its oil infrastructure and supply lines, we believe that we’ve cut ISIL’s revenue from oil by millions of dollars per month. In destroying the storage sites where they keep their cash, we’ve deprived ISIL of many millions more. Thanks to the great work of Secretary Lew and many others here today -- and working with nations and financial institutions around the world -- ISIL is now effectively cut off from the international financial system. Cutting off ISIL’s money may not be as dramatic as military strikes, but it is critically important. And we’re seeing the results. ISIL’s cash reserves are down. It has had to cut salaries for its fighters. It’s resorting to more extortion of those trapped in its grip. And by ISIL’s own admission, some of its own leaders have been caught stealing cash and gold. Once again, ISIL’s true nature has been revealed: These are not religious warriors, they are thugs and they are thieves. In continuing to push on this front, I want to mention that it is critical for our friends in the Senate to confirm Adam Szubin, my nominee for Under Secretary of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence. Adam has served in Democratic and Republican administrations. Everyone agrees he’s eminently qualified. He has been working on these kinds of issues for years. It’s now been more than a year since I nominated him -- more than 420 days -- and he still has not been given a full vote. There is no good reason for it. It is inexcusable. So it’s time for the Senate to do its job, put our national security first, and have a vote on Adam Szubin that can lead our financial fight against ISIL and help keep our country safe. ISIL’s ranks are shrinking as well. Their morale is sinking. As one defender -- as one defector said, ISIL “is not bringing Islam to the world, and people need to know that.” Thanks to international efforts, the flow of foreign fighters -- including from America to Syria and Iraq -- has plummeted. In fact, our intelligence community now assesses that the ranks of ISIL fighters has been reduced to the lowest levels in more than two and half years. Even as we continue to destroy ISIL militarily, we’re addressing the larger forces that have allowed these terrorists to gain traction in parts of the world. With regard to Iraq, this means helping Iraqis stabilize liberated communities and promote inclusive governance so ISIL cannot return. With regard to Syria, it means our continued support for the fragile cessation of hostilities there. The cessation of hostilities has not stopped all or even most of the hardship on the Syrian people, the hardship on civilians. And the Assad regime has been the principal culprit in violating the cessation of hostilities. ISIL and al Nusra, which is al Qaeda's affiliate in Syria, also continue to terrorize Syrians. But as fragile and incomplete as the cessation is, it has saved lives and it has allowed the delivery of some lifesaving aid to Syrians who are in desperate need. And as difficult as it is, we will continue to push for a political process that can end the civil war and result in a transition away from Assad. Beyond Syria and Libya -- beyond Syria and Iraq, ISIL is also losing ground in Libya. Forces of the Libyan unity government are going after ISIL in their stronghold in Sirte. And we’ll continue to assist the new Libyan government as it works to secure its country. Lastly, here at home, if we really want to help law enforcement protect Americans from homegrown extremists, the kind of tragedies that occurred at San Bernardino and that now have occurred in Orlando, there is a meaningful way to do that. We have to make it harder for people who want to kill Americans to get their hands on weapons of war that let them kill dozens of innocents. It is absolutely true we cannot prevent every tragedy. But we know that, consistent with the Second Amendment, there are common-sense steps that could reduce gun violence and could reduce the lethality of somebody who intends to do other people harm. We should give ATF the resources they need to enforce the gun laws that we already have. People with possible ties to terrorism who aren't allowed on a plane shouldn't be allowed to buy a gun. Enough talking about being tough on terrorism. Actually be tough on terrorism, and stop making it easy as possible for terrorists to buy assault weapons. Reinstate the assault weapons ban. Make it harder for terrorists to use these weapons to kill us. Otherwise, despite extraordinary efforts across our government by local law enforcement, by our intelligence agencies, by our military, despite all the sacrifices that folks make, these kinds of events are going to keep on happening. And the weapons are only going to get more powerful. And let me make a final point. For a while now, the main contribution of some of my friends on the other side of the aisle have made in the fight against ISIL is to criticize this administration and me for not using the phrase “radical Islam.” That’s the key, they tell us -- we can’t beat ISIL unless we call them “radical Islamists.” What exactly would using this label accomplish? What exactly would it change? Would it make ISIL less committed to trying to kill Americans? Would it bring in more allies? Is there a military strategy that is served by this? The answer is none of the above. Calling a threat by a different name does not make it go away. This is a political distraction. Since before I was President, I’ve been clear about how extremist groups have perverted Islam to justify terrorism. As President, I have repeatedly called on our Muslim friends and allies at home and around the world to work with us to reject this twisted interpretation of one of the world’s great religions. There has not been a moment in my seven and a half years as President where we have not been able to pursue a strategy because we didn’t use the label "radical Islam." Not once has an advisor of mine said, man, if we really use that phrase, we're going to turn this whole thing around. Not once. So if someone seriously thinks that we don’t know who we're fighting, if there's anyone out there who thinks we're confused about who our enemies are, that would come as a surprise to the thousands of terrorists who we've taken off the battlefield. If the implication is that those of us up here and the thousands of people around the country and around the world who are working to defeat ISIL aren't taking the fight seriously, that would come as a surprise to those who have spent these last seven and a half years dismantling al Qaeda in the FATA, for example -- including the men and women in uniform who put their lives at risk and the Special Forces that I ordered to get bin Laden and are now on the ground in Iraq and in Syria. They know full well who the enemy is. So do the intelligence and law enforcement officers who spend countless hours disrupting plots and protecting all Americans, including politicians who tweet and appear on cable news shows. They know who the nature of the enemy is. So there’s no magic to the phrase “radical Islam.” It’s a political talking point; it's not a strategy. And the reason I am careful about how I describe this threat has nothing to do with political correctness and everything to do with actually defeating extremism. Groups like ISIL and al Qaeda want to make this war a war between Islam and America, or between Islam and the West. They want to claim that they are the true leaders of over a billion Muslims around the world who reject their crazy notions. They want us to validate them by implying that they speak for those billion-plus people; that they speak for Islam. That’s their propaganda. That's how they recruit. And if we fall into the trap of painting all Muslims with a broad brush and imply that we are at war with an entire religion -- then we’re doing the terrorists' work for them. Now, up until this point, this argument about labels has mostly just been partisan rhetoric. And, sadly, we've all become accustomed to that kind of partisanship, even when it involves the fight against these extremist groups. And that kind of yapping has not prevented folks across government from doing their jobs, from sacrificing and working really hard to protect the American people. But we are now seeing how dangerous this kind of mindset and this kind of thinking can be. We're starting to see where this kind of rhetoric and loose talk and sloppiness about who exactly we're fighting, where this can lead us. We now have proposals from the presumptive Republican nominee for President of the United States to bar all Muslims from emigrating to America. We hear language that singles out immigrants and suggests that entire religious communities are complicit in violence. Where does this stop? The Orlando killer, one of the San Bernardino killers, the Fort Hood killer -- they were all U.S. citizens. Are we going to start treating all Muslim Americans differently? Are we going to start subjecting them to special surveillance? Are we going to start discriminating against them because of their faith? We’ve heard these suggestions during the course of this campaign. Do Republican officials actually agree with this? Because that's not the America we want. It doesn't reflect our democratic ideals. It won’t make us more safe; it will make us less safe -- fueling ISIL’s notion that the West hates Muslims, making young Muslims in this country and around the world feel like no matter what they do, they're going to be under suspicion and under attack. It makes Muslim Americans feel like they're government is betraying them. It betrays the very values America stands for. We've gone through moments in our history before when we acted out of fear -- and we came to regret it. We've seen our government mistreat our fellow citizens. And it has been a shameful part of our history. This is a country founded on basic freedoms, including freedom of religion. We don't have religious tests here. Our Founders, our Constitution, our Bill of Rights are clear about that. And if we ever abandon those values, we would not only make it a lot easier to radicalize people here and around the world, but we would have betrayed the very things we are trying to protect -- the pluralism and the openness, our rule of law, our civil liberties -- the very things that make this country great; the very things that make us exceptional. And then the terrorists would have won. And we cannot let that happen. I will not let that happen. Two weeks ago, I was at the commencement ceremony at the Air Force Academy. And it could not have been more inspiring to see these young people stepping up, dedicated to serve and protect this country. And part of what was inspiring was the incredible diversity of these cadets. We saw cadets, who are straight, applauding classmates who were openly gay. We saw cadets, born here in America, applauding classmates who are immigrants and love this country so much they decided they wanted to be part of our armed forces. We saw cadets and families of all religions applaud cadets who are proud, patriotic Muslim Americans serving their country in uniform, ready to lay their lives on the line to protect you and to protect me. We saw male cadets applauding for female classmates, who can now serve in combat positions. That’s the American military. That’s America -- one team, one nation. Those are the values that ISIL is trying to destroy, and we shouldn’t help them do it. Our diversity and our respect for one another, our drawing on the talents of everybody in this country, our making sure that we are treating everybody fairly -- that we’re not judging people on the basis of what faith they are or what race they are, or what ethnicity they are, or what their sexual orientation is -- that’s what makes this country great. That’s the spirit we see in Orlando. That’s the unity and resolve that will allow us to defeat ISIL. That’s what will preserve our values and our ideals that define us as Americans. That’s how we’re going to defend this nation, and that’s how we’re going to defend our way of life. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Good morning, everybody. Last night, on my orders, America’s armed forces began strikes against ISIL targets in Syria. Today, the American people give thanks for the extraordinary service of our men and women in uniform, including the pilots who flew these missions with the courage and professionalism that we've come to expect from the finest military that the world has ever known. Earlier this month, I outlined for the American people our strategy to confront the threat posed by the terrorist group known as ISIL. I made clear that as part of this campaign the United States would take action against targets in both Iraq and Syria so that these terrorists can't find safe haven anywhere. I also made clear that America would act as part of a broad coalition. And that's exactly what we've done. We were joined in this action by our friends and partners — Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Bahrain, and Qatar. America is proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with these nations on behalf of our common security. The strength of this coalition makes it clear to the world that this is not America’s fight alone. Above all, the people and governments in the Middle East are rejecting ISIL and standing up for the peace and security that the people of the region and the world deserve. Meanwhile, we will move forward with our plans, supported by bipartisan majorities in Congress, to ramp up our effort to train and equip the Syrian opposition, who are the best counterweight to ISIL and the Assad regime. And more broadly, over 40 nations have offered to help in this comprehensive effort to confront this terrorist threat — to take out terrorist targets; to train and equip Iraqi and Syrian opposition fighters who are going up against ISIL on the ground; to cut off ISIL’s financing; to counter its hateful ideology; and to stop the flow of fighters into and out of the region. Last night, we also took strikes to disrupt plotting against the United States and our allies by seasoned al Qaeda operatives in Syria who are known as the Khorosan Group. And once again, it must be clear to anyone who would plot against America and try to do Americans harm that we will not tolerate safe havens for terrorists who threaten our people. I've spoken to leaders in Congress and I'm pleased that there is bipartisan support for the actions we are taking. America is always stronger when we stand united, and that unity sends a powerful message to the world that we will do what’s necessary to defend our country. Over the next several days I will have the opportunity to meet with Prime Minister Abadi of Iraq, and with friends and allies at the United Nations to continue building support for the coalition that is confronting this serious threat to our peace and security. The overall effort will take time. There will be challenges ahead. But we're going to do what’s necessary to take the fight to this terrorist group, for the security of the country and the region and for the entire world. Thanks. God bless our troops. God bless America. THE PRESIDENT: Good afternoon, everybody. Today, the entire world is appalled by the brutal murder of Jim Foley by the terrorist group, ISIL. Jim was a journalist, a son, a brother, and a friend. He reported from difficult and dangerous places, bearing witness to the lives of people a world away. He was taken hostage nearly two years ago in Syria, and he was courageously reporting at the time on the conflict there. Jim was taken from us in an act of violence that shocks the conscience of the entire world. He was 40 years old — one of five siblings, the son of a mom and dad who worked tirelessly for his release. Earlier today, I spoke to the Foleys and told them that we are all heartbroken at their loss, and join them in honoring Jim and all that he did. Jim Foley’s life stands in stark contrast to his killers. Let’s be clear about ISIL. They have rampaged across cities and villages — killing innocent, unarmed civilians in cowardly acts of violence. They abduct women and children, and subject them to torture and rape and slavery. They have murdered Muslims — both Sunni and Shia — by the thousands. They target Christians and religious minorities, driving them from their homes, murdering them when they can for no other reason than they practice a different religion. They declared their ambition to commit genocide against an ancient people. So ISIL speaks for no religion. Their victims are overwhelmingly Muslim, and no faith teaches people to massacre innocents. No just God would stand for what they did yesterday, and for what they do every single day. ISIL has no ideology of any value to human beings. Their ideology is bankrupt. They may claim out of expediency that they are at war with the United States or the West, but the fact is they terrorize their neighbors and offer them nothing but an endless slavery to their empty vision, and the collapse of any definition of civilized behavior. And people like this ultimately fail. They fail, because the future is won by those who build and not destroy and the world is shaped by people like Jim Foley, and the overwhelming majority of humanity who are appalled by those who killed him. The United States of America will continue to do what we must do to protect our people. We will be vigilant and we will be relentless. When people harm Americans, anywhere, we do what’s necessary to see that justice is done. And we act against ISIL, standing alongside others. The people of Iraq, who with our support are taking the fight to ISIL, must continue coming together to expel these terrorists from their communities. The people of Syria, whose story Jim Foley told, do not deserve to live under the shadow of a tyrant or terrorists. They have our support in their pursuit of a future rooted in dignity. From governments and peoples across the Middle East there has to be a common effort to extract this cancer, so that it does not spread. There has to be a clear rejection of these kind of nihilistic ideologies. One thing we can all agree on is that a group like ISIL has no place in the 21st century. Friends and allies around the world, we share a common security and a common set of values that are rooted in the opposite of what we saw yesterday. And we will continue to confront this hateful terrorism, and replace it with a sense of hope and civility. And that’s what Jim Foley stood for, a man who lived his work; who courageously told the stories of his fellow human beings; who was liked and loved by friends and family. Today, the American people will all say a prayer for those who loved Jim. All of us feel the ache of his absence. All of us mourn his loss. We keep in our prayers those other Americans who are separated from their families. We will do everything that we can to protect our people and the timeless values that we stand for. May God bless and keep Jim’s memory, and may God bless the United States of America. THE PRESIDENT: Good morning, everybody. A few minutes ago, Secretary Shinseki and Rob Nabors, who I’ve temporarily assigned to work with the VA, presented me with the department’s initial review of VA facilities nationwide. And what they’ve found is that the misconduct has not been limited to a few VA facilities, but many across the country. That’s totally unacceptable. Our veterans deserve the best. They’ve earned it. Last week, I said that if we found misconduct, it would be punished. And I meant it. Secretary Shinseki has now begun the process of firing many of the people responsible, including senior leaders at the Phoenix VA. He’s canceled any possible performance bonuses this year for VHA senior executives. And he has ordered the VA to personally contact every veteran in Phoenix waiting for appointments to get them the care that they need and that they deserve. This morning, I think some of you also heard Ric take a truly remarkable action — in public remarks, he took responsibility for the conduct of those facilities, and apologized to his fellow veterans and to the American people. And a few minutes ago, Secretary Shinseki offered me his own resignation. With considerable regret, I accepted. Ric Shinseki has served his country with honor for nearly 50 years. He did two tours of combat in Vietnam — he’s a veteran who left a part of himself on the battlefield. He rose to command the First Cavalry Division, served as Army Chief of Staff, and has never been afraid to speak truth to power. As Secretary at the VA, he presided over record investments in our veterans — enrolling 2 million new veterans in health care, delivering disability pay to more Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange, making it easier for veterans with post-traumatic stress, mental health issues and traumatic brain injury to get treatment, improving care for our women veterans. At the same time, he helped reduce veteran homelessness, and helped more than 1 million veterans, servicemembers and their families pursue their education under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. So Ric’s commitment to our veterans is unquestioned. His service to our country is exemplary. I am grateful for his service, as are many veterans across the country. He has worked hard to investigate and identify the problems with access to care, but as he told me this morning, the VA needs new leadership to address them. He does not want to be a distraction, because his priority is to fix the problem and make sure our vets are getting the care that they need. That was Ric’s judgment on behalf of his fellow veterans. And I agree. We don't have time for distractions. We need to fix the problem. For now, the leader that will help move us forward is Sloan Gibson, who will take on the reins as Acting Secretary. Sloan became Deputy Secretary at the VA just three months ago, but he, too, has devoted his life to serving our country and our veterans. His grandfather fought on the front lines of World War I. His father was a tail-gunner in World War II. Sloan graduated from West Point, earned his Airborne and Ranger qualifications, and served in the infantry. And most recently, he was President and CEO of the USO, which does a remarkable job supporting our men and women at war, their families, our wounded warriors, and families of the fallen. So all told, Sloan has 20 years of private sector and nonprofit experience that he brings to bear on our ongoing work to build a 21st century VA. And I’m grateful that he is willing to take on this task. I met with Sloan after I met with Ric this morning, and made it clear that reforms should not wait. They need to proceed immediately. I’ve also asked Rob Nabors to stay at the VA temporarily to help Sloan and the department through this transition, and to complete his own review of the VHA. In the meantime, we’re going to look diligently for a new permanent VA Secretary and we hope to confirm that successor and fill that post as soon as possible. We’re going to do right by our veterans across the board, as long as it takes. We're not going to stop working to make sure that they get the care, the benefit, and the opportunities that they’ve earned and they deserve. I said we wouldn’t tolerate misconduct, and we will not. I said that we have to do better, and we will. There are too many veterans receiving care right now who deserve all of our best efforts — and an honest assessment if something is not working. This week, I visited some of our men and women in uniform at different stages of their service: our newest Army officers who graduated from West Point; our troops currently serving in Afghanistan; our veterans and our military families at Arlington. And what I saw is what I’ve seen in every single servicemember, veteran, and military spouse that I have had the privilege to meet — a selfless, clear-eyed commitment to serving their country the best way that they know how. They’re the best that our country has to offer. They do their duty. They expect us to do ours. So, today, I want every man and woman who’s served under our flag to know — whether your tour has been over for decades, or it’s just about to end — we will never stop working to do right by you and your families. Let me take a couple questions. Leo Shane from Military Times. Q Mr. President, what changed in your opinion of Secretary Shinseki in the last few days? You had said you had confidence in him — even him coming in today and saying it was time for him to resign. What made the difference in your mind? THE PRESIDENT: Ric’s judgment. I think his belief that he would be a distraction from the task at hand, which is to make sure that what’s broken gets fixed so that his fellow veterans are getting the services that they need. I want to reiterate, he is a very good man. I don’t just mean he’s an accomplished man. I don’t just mean that he’s been an outstanding soldier. He’s a good person who’s done exemplary work on our behalf. And under his leadership, we have seen more progress on more fronts at the VA and a bigger investment in the VA than just about any other VA Secretary: Cut veterans’ homelessness by 24 percent; brought in folks who had been exposed to Agent Orange who had been waiting for decades to get the services and benefits that they had earned; making sure that post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury was dealt with in a serious way; making sure we had facilities for our women vets, who all too often weren’t receiving the kind of specialized services that they needed. So he’s been a champion of our veterans. And where there’s problems, he has been ready and willing to get in there and fix them. So with the disability backlog that had shot up as a consequence of the admission of the Agent Orange veterans, as well as making it easier to apply for post-traumatic stress disorder disability claims — when it spiked, he went at it in a systematic way, and we’ve now cut it by 50 percent over the course of the last year or so. He’s not adverse to admitting where there’s a problem and going after it. But we occupy a — not just an environment that calls for management fixes, we’ve also got to deal with Congress and you guys. And I think Ric’s judgment that he could not carry out the next stages of reform without being a distraction himself. And so my assessment was, unfortunately, that he was right. I regret that he has to resign under these circumstances, but I also have confidence in Sloan, and I share Ric Shinseki’s assessment that the number-one priority is making sure that problems get fixed so that if there’s a veteran out there who needs help that they’re getting a schedule and they’re able to come in and see a doctor, and that if there are facilities that don’t have enough doctors or do not have enough nurses or do not have enough space, that that information immediately gets in the hands of decision-makers, all the way up to me and all the way to Congress, so that we can get more resources in there to help folks. And that seems to be the biggest problem. I think that’s the thing that offended Secretary Shinseki the most during the course of this process. He described to me the fact that when he was in theater, he might have to order an attack just based on a phone call from some 20-something-year-old corporal, and he’s got to trust that he’s getting good information — and it’s life or death. And I think he is deeply disappointed in the fact that bad news did not get to him, and that the structures weren’t in place for him to identify this problem quickly and fix it. His priority now is to make sure that happens, and he felt like new leadership would be — would serve our veterans best. And I agree with him. Phil Mattingly. Q Thank you, Mr. President. Based on the audit, at least the early stage audit the Secretary presented to you, is there a sense that there was criminal wrongdoing? And I guess more broadly, how much responsibility do you personally bear, as this being an issue you campaigned on and cared about deeply — you said cared about deeply during your administration — now that we’re at this point? THE PRESIDENT: Well, I will leave it up to the Justice Department to make determinations in terms of whether there’s been criminal wrongdoing. In terms of responsibility, as I’ve said before, this is my administration; I always take responsibility for whatever happens. And this is an area that I have a particular concern with. This predates my presidency. When I was in the Senate, I was on the Veterans Affairs Committee. I heard firsthand veterans who were not getting the kinds of services and benefits that they had earned. And I pledged that if I had the privilege of serving as Commander-in-Chief and President, that we would fix it. The VA is a big organization that has had problems for a very long time — in some cases, management problems; in some cases, funding problems. And so what we’ve tried to do is to systematically go after the problems that we were aware of and fix them. And where we have seen our veterans not being properly served — whether it was too many homeless veterans, or a disability claims process that was taking too long — we would go at it and chip away at it and fix it. When it came to funding, we’ve increased funding for VA services in an unprecedented fashion, because we understood that it’s not enough just to give lip service to our veterans, but not being willing to put our money where our mouth is. And so what I can say confidently is that this has been a priority, it’s been a priority reflected in my budget, and that in terms of managing the VA, where we have seen a problem, where we have been aware of a problem, we have gone after it and fixed it, and have been able to make significant progress. But what is absolutely clear is this one, this issue of scheduling, is one that the reporting systems inside of the VHA did not surface to the level where Ric was aware of it or we were able to see it. This was not something that we were hearing when I was traveling around the country — the particular issues of schedule. And what we’re going to have to do — part of the review is going to have to be to see how do we make sure that we get information about systems that aren’t working. I just was talking to Rob Nabors, and he described to me, for example, just in very specific detail, how in some of these facilities you’ve got computer systems for scheduling that date back to the ‘90s; situations in which one scheduler might have to look at four or five different screens to figure out where there’s a slot and where there might be a doctor available; situations in which they’re manually passing requests for an appointment over to somebody else, who’s then inputting them. Right? So you have in many cases old systems, broken-down systems. This is stuff that is eminently fixable, but we’ve got to know about it. And the big concern that I’ve got, and what I’m going to be interested in finding out, is how is it that in a number of these facilities, if, in fact, you have veterans who are waiting too long for an appointment, that that information didn’t surface sooner so that we could go ahead and fix it. One last point I want to make on this: When veterans have gotten access to the system, the health care itself that they are receiving has gotten high marks from our veterans service organizations and the veterans themselves. So I think it’s important to keep in mind that what the review indicates so far, at least, is that there have been great strides made in the actual care provided to veterans. The challenge is getting veterans into the door, particularly for their first appointment, in some cases, and where they don’t have an established relationship with a doctor and they’re not in the system. Part of that is going to be technology. Part of that is management. But as Ric Shinseki himself indicated, there is a need for a change in culture within the VHA, and perhaps the VHA as a whole — or the VA as a whole that makes sure that bad news gets surfaced quickly so that things can be fixed. And I know that was the attitude of Secretary Shinseki, and that was what he communicated to folks under him but they didn’t execute. And that’s a problem. Christi Parsons, last question. Q Thank you, Mr. President. You said that it was the General’s own judgment that made the decision for you here. If I remember correctly, Secretary Sebelius offered you her resignation after healthcare.gov failed, and you declined to take it. So I wonder if there’s a little bit of scapegoating taking place here. THE PRESIDENT: Meaning? Q Meaning, I mean, the dysfunction within the department seems to have been very deep and very widespread. THE PRESIDENT: Yes. Q So is lopping off the head of it really the best step to take going forward here? What I’m asking is, is there a political reason for removing him other than going straight to the problem of the bureaucracy? THE PRESIDENT: Well, the distractions that Ric refers to in part are political. He needs to be — at this stage, what I want is somebody at the VA who is not spending time outside of solving problems for the veterans. I want somebody who’s spending every minute of every day figuring out have we called every single veteran that’s waiting; have they gotten a schedule; are we fixing the system; what kind of new technology do we need; have we made a realistic assessment of how long the wait times are right now, and how are we going to bring those wait times down in certain facilities where the wait times are too long; if we need more money, how much more money do we need to ask from Congress, and how am I going to make sure Congress delivers on that additional funding. That’s what I want somebody at the VA focused on. Not how are they getting second-guessed, and speculations about their futures, and so forth and so on. And that was what Ric agreed to, as well. With respect to Secretary Sebelius, at the time I thought it would be a distraction to replace somebody at HHS at a time when we were trying to fix that system. And I wanted to just stay focused because I knew that if we bear down on it and we got folks enrolled that it would work. So in each instance, my primary decision is based on, how can I deliver service to the American people, and in this case, how can I deliver for our veterans. And because they are people of integrity, I think in both the cases of Secretary Sebelius, but certainly in the case here of Ric Shinseki, they’ve got the same priority. They’re view is, what is it that is going to best deliver on behalf of folks who, as Ric said this morning, have been let down. Q I remember at the time that you felt she had so much knowledge about what had gone wrong that you couldn’t afford to lose that. THE PRESIDENT: Right. Q Does somebody with three months in leadership at the department have the capacity to attack the problem quickly now? THE PRESIDENT: Well, we’re going to need a new VA Secretary. So Sloan is acting. Sloan, I think, would be the first to acknowledge that he’s going to have a learning curve that he’s got to deal with. But the nature of the problem that has surfaced and has been the cause of this attention is one that we can start tackling right away, and without completely transforming the system we can immediately make some progress. We’re going to have some longer-term issues that we’re going to have to take care of. So my first step is everybody who’s out there waiting, get them an appointment. If we need more doctors, let’s figure out how we can surge some doctors in there to make sure that they’re getting the help that they need. What I wanted to make sure of then is that even if it’s still patchwork, how do we make sure that there is no slippage between somebody making a phone call and them getting an appointment scheduled. And let’s have a realistic time for how soon they’re going to get an appointment. Those are things that don’t require rocket science. It requires execution; it requires discipline; it requires focus. Those are things that Sloan has. There are then going to be some broader issues that we’re going to have to tackle. The information systems inside the VHA, those are probably going to have to be changed. That will cost some money, that will take some time, and it will have to be implemented. I think there are going to have to be some changes in the culture within the VHA, because as I said, they’re providing very good service, medical treatment to our veterans when they get in the system, but they don’t have, apparently, the state-of-the-art operations that you would want to see, for example, in a major medical center or hospital. Now, keep in mind, those of us who are outside of the VA system and try to get an appointment with the doctor in the private sector, and try to get an appointment for — a schedule for a hospital visit, there are probably some wait times as well. So part of what we have to do is figure out what are realistic benchmarks for the system. And my suspicion is that with not only all the veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan coming back, but also the aging of our Vietnam vets who may have more chronic illnesses, may need more visits — we may need to get more doctors, and we may need to get more nurses. And that’s going to cost some money, which means that’s going to have to be reflected in a Veterans Affairs budget, which I have consistently increased. Even during fiscally tight times, there’s been no area where I’ve put more priority than making sure that we’re delivering the kind of budget that’s necessary to make sure our veterans are being served, but it may still not be enough. And we’re going to — but before we start spending more money, our first job is let’s take care of some basic management issues that I think can be fixed. All right? Thank you. Good morning. Thank you, General Caslen, for that introduction. To General Trainor, General Clarke, and the faculty and staff at West Point – you have been outstanding stewards of this proud institution, and excellent mentors for the newest officers in the United States Army. I’d like to acknowledge the Army’s leadership – Secretary McHugh and General Odierno, as well as Senator Jack Reed – a proud graduate of West Point himself. To the class of 2014, I congratulate you on taking your place on the Long Gray Line. Among you is the first all-female command team: Erin Mauldin and Austen Boroff. In Calla Glavin, you have a Rhodes Scholar, and Josh Herbeck proves that West Point accuracy extends beyond the three point line. To the entire class, let me reassure you in these final hours at West Point: as Commander-in-Chief, I hereby absolve all cadets who are on restriction for minor conduct offenses. Let me just say that nobody ever did that for me when I was in school. I know you join me in extending a word of thanks to your families. Joe DeMoss, whose son James is graduating, spoke for many parents when he wrote me a letter about the sacrifices you have made. “Deep inside,” he wrote, “we want to explode with pride at what they are committing to do in the service of our country.” Like several graduates, James is a combat veteran. And I would like to ask all of us here today to stand and pay tribute – not only to the veterans among us, but to the more than 2.5 million Americans who have served in Iraq and Afghanistan, and their families. It is a particularly useful time for America to reflect on those who have sacrificed so much for our freedom – for you are the first class to graduate since 9/11 who may not be sent into combat in Iraq or Afghanistan. When I first spoke at West Point in 2009, we still had more than 100,000 troops in Iraq. We were preparing to surge in Afghanistan. Our counter-terrorism efforts were focused on al Qaeda’s core leadership. And our nation was just beginning a long climb out of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. Four and a half years later, the landscape has changed. We have removed our troops from Iraq. We are winding down our war in Afghanistan. Al Qaeda’s leadership in the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan has been decimated, and Osama bin Laden is no more. Through it all, we have refocused our investments in a key source of American strength: a growing economy that can provide opportunity here at home. In fact, by most measures, America has rarely been stronger relative to the rest of the world. Those who argue otherwise – who suggest that America is in decline, or has seen its global leadership slip away – are either misreading history or engaged in partisan politics. Think about it. Our military has no peer. The odds of a direct threat against us by any nation are low, and do not come close to the dangers we faced during the Cold War. Meanwhile, our economy remains the most dynamic on Earth; our businesses the most innovative. Each year, we grow more energy independent. From Europe to Asia, we are the hub of alliances unrivalled in the history of nations. America continues to attract striving immigrants. The values of our founding inspire leaders in parliaments and new movements in public squares around the globe. And when a typhoon hits the Philippines, or girls are kidnapped in Nigeria, or masked men occupy a building in Ukraine – it is America that the world looks to for help. The United States is the one indispensable nation. That has been true for the century passed, and will likely be true for the century to come. But the world is changing with accelerating speed. This presents opportunity, but also new dangers. We know all too well, after 9/11, just how technology and globalization has put power once reserved for states in the hands of the individual, raising the capacity of terrorists to do harm. Russia’s aggression toward former Soviet states unnerves capitals in Europe, while China’s economic rise and military reach worries its neighbors. From Brazil to India, rising middle classes compete with our own, and governments seek a greater say in global forums. And even as developing nations embrace democracy and market economies, 24 hours news and pervasive social media makes it impossible to ignore sectarian conflicts, failing states and popular uprisings that might have received only passing notice a generation ago. It will be your generation’s task to respond to this new world. The question we face – the question you will face – is not whether America will lead, but how we will lead, not just to secure our peace and prosperity, but also to extend peace and prosperity around the globe. This question isn’t new. At least since George Washington served as Commander-in-Chief, there have been those who warned against foreign entanglements that do not touch directly on our security or economic well-being. Today, according to self-described realists, conflicts in Syria or Ukraine or the Central African Republic are not ours to solve. Not surprisingly, after costly wars and continuing challenges at home, that view is shared by many Americans. A different view, from interventionists on the left and right, says we ignore these conflicts at our own peril; that America’s willingness to apply force around the world is the ultimate safeguard against chaos, and America’s failure to act in the face of Syrian brutality or Russian provocations not only violates our conscience, but invites escalating aggression in the future. Each side can point to history to support its claims. But I believe neither view fully speaks to the demands of this moment. It is absolutely true that in the 21st century, American isolationism is not an option. If nuclear materials are not secure, that could pose a danger in American cities. As the Syrian civil war spills across borders, the capacity of battle-hardened groups to come after us increases. Regional aggression that goes unchecked – in southern Ukraine, the South China Sea, or anywhere else in the world – will ultimately impact our allies, and could draw in our military. Beyond these narrow rationales, I believe we have a real stake – an abiding self-interest – in making sure our children grow up in a world where school-girls are not kidnapped; where individuals aren’t slaughtered because of tribe or faith or political beliefs. I believe that a world of greater freedom and tolerance is not only a moral imperative – it also helps keep us safe. But to say that we have an interest in pursuing peace and freedom beyond our borders is not to say that every problem has a military solution. Since World War II, some of our most costly mistakes came not from our restraint, but from our willingness to rush into military adventures – without thinking through the consequences; without building international support and legitimacy for our action, or leveling with the American people about the sacrifice required. Tough talk draws headlines, but war rarely conforms to slogans. As General Eisenhower, someone with hard-earned knowledge on this subject, said at this ceremony in 1947: “War is mankind’s most tragic and stupid folly; to seek or advise its deliberate provocation is a black crime against all men.” Like Eisenhower, this generation of men and women in uniform know all too well the wages of war. That includes those of you at West Point. Four of the service-members who stood in the audience when I announced the surge of our forces in Afghanistan gave their lives in that effort. More were wounded. I believe America’s security demanded those deployments. But I am haunted by those deaths. I am haunted by those wounds. And I would betray my duty to you, and to the country we love, if I sent you into harm’s way simply because I saw a problem somewhere in the world that needed fixing, or because I was worried about critics who think military intervention is the only way for America to avoid looking weak. Here’s my bottom line: America must always lead on the world stage. If we don’t, no one else will. The military that you have joined is, and always will be, the backbone of that leadership. But U.S. military action cannot be the only – or even primary – component of our leadership in every instance. Just because we have the best hammer does not mean that every problem is a nail. And because the costs associated with military action are so high, you should expect every civilian leader – and especially your Commander-in-Chief – to be clear about how that awesome power should be used. Let me spend the rest of my time, then, describing my vision for how the United States of America, and our military, should lead in the years to come. First, let me repeat a principle I put forward at the outset of my presidency: the United States will use military force, unilaterally if necessary, when our core interests demand it – when our people are threatened; when our livelihood is at stake; or when the security of our allies is in danger. In these circumstances, we still need to ask tough questions about whether our action is proportional, effective and just. International opinion matters. But America should never ask permission to protect our people, our homeland, or our way of life. On the other hand, when issues of global concern that do not pose a direct threat to the United States are at stake – when crises arise that stir our conscience or push the world in a more dangerous direction – then the threshold for military action must be higher. In such circumstances, we should not go it alone. Instead, we must mobilize allies and partners to take collective action. We must broaden our tools to include diplomacy and development; sanctions and isolation; appeals to international law and – if just, necessary, and effective – multilateral military action. We must do so because collective action in these circumstances is more likely to succeed, more likely to be sustained, and less likely to lead to costly mistakes. This leads to my second point: for the foreseeable future, the most direct threat to America at home and abroad remains terrorism. But a strategy that involves invading every country that harbors terrorist networks is naïve and unsustainable. I believe we must shift our counter-terrorism strategy – drawing on the successes and shortcomings of our experience in Iraq and Afghanistan – to more effectively partner with countries where terrorist networks seek a foothold. This reflects the fact that today’s principal threat no longer comes from a centralized al Qaeda leadership. Instead, it comes from decentralized al Qaeda affiliates and extremists, many with agendas focused in the countries where they operate. This lessens the possibility of large-scale 9/11-style attacks against the homeland, but heightens the danger to U.S. personnel overseas, as we saw in Benghazi; or less defensible targets, as we saw in a shopping mall in Nairobi. We need a strategy that matches this diffuse threat; one that expands our reach without sending forces that stretch our military thin, or stir up local resentments. Empowering partners is a large part of what we’ve done in Afghanistan. Together with our allies, America struck huge blows against al Qaeda core, and pushed back against an insurgency that threatened to overrun the country. But sustaining this progress depends on the ability of Afghans to do the job. That’s why we trained hundreds of thousands of Afghan soldiers and police. Earlier this spring, those forces secured an election in which Afghans voted for the first democratic transfer of power in their history. At the end of this year, a new Afghan President will be in office, and America’s combat mission will be over. Now, as we move to a train and advise mission in Afghanistan, our reduced presence there will allow us to more effectively address emerging threats in the Middle East and North Africa. Earlier this year, I asked my national security team to develop a plan for a network of partnerships from South Asia to the Sahel. Today, as part of this effort, I am calling on Congress to support a new Counter-Terrorism Partnerships Fund of up to $5 billion, which will allow us to train, build capacity, and facilitate partner countries on the front lines. These resources will give us flexibility to fulfill different missions, including training security forces in Yemen who have gone on the offensive against al Qaeda; supporting a multinational force to keep the peace in Somalia; working with European allies to train a functioning security force and border patrol in Libya; and facilitating French operations in Mali. A critical focus of this effort will be the ongoing crisis in Syria. As frustrating as it is, there are no easy answers – no military solution that can eliminate the terrible suffering anytime soon. As President, I made a decision that we should not put American troops into the middle of this increasingly sectarian civil war, and I believe that is the right decision. But that does not mean we shouldn’t help the Syrian people stand up against a dictator who bombs and starves his people. And in helping those who fight for the right of all Syrians to choose their own future, we also push back against the growing number of extremists who find safe-haven in the chaos. With the additional resources I’m announcing today, we will step up our efforts to support Syria’s neighbors – Jordan and Lebanon; Turkey and Iraq – as they host refugees, and confront terrorists working across Syrian borders. I will work with Congress to ramp up support for those in the Syrian opposition who offer the best alternative to terrorists and a brutal dictator. And we will continue to coordinate with our friends and allies in Europe and the Arab World – to push for a political resolution of this crisis, and make sure that those countries, and not just the United States, are contributing their fair share of support to the Syrian people. Let me make one final point about our efforts against terrorism. The partnership I’ve described does not eliminate the need to take direct action when necessary to protect ourselves. When we have actionable intelligence, that’s what we do – through capture operations, like the one that brought a terrorist involved in the plot to bomb our Embassies in 1998 to face justice; or drone strikes, like those we have carried out in Yemen and Somalia. But as I said last year, in taking direct action, we must uphold standards that reflect our values. That means taking strikes only when we face a continuing, imminent threat, and only where there is near certainty of no civilian casualties. For our actions should meet a simple test: we must not create more enemies than we take off the battlefield. I also believe we be more transparent about both the basis for our actions, and the manner in which they are carried out – whether it is drone strikes, or training partners. I will increasingly turn to our military to take the lead and provide information to the public about our efforts. Our intelligence community has done outstanding work and we must continue to protect sources and methods. But, when we cannot explain our efforts clearly and publicly, we face terrorist propaganda and international suspicion; we erode legitimacy with our partners and our people; and we reduce accountability in our own government. This issue of transparency is directly relevant to a third aspect of American leadership: our efforts to strengthen and enforce international order. After World War II, America had the wisdom to shape institutions to keep the peace and support human progress – from NATO and the United Nations, to the World Bank and IMF. Though imperfect, these institutions have been a force multiplier – reducing the need for unilateral American action, and increased restraint among other nations. But just as the world has changed, this architecture must change as well. At the height of the Cold War, President Kennedy spoke about the need for a peace based upon, “a gradual evolution in human institutions.” Evolving these institutions to meet the demands of today must be a critical part of American leadership. Of course, skeptics often downplay the effectiveness of multilateral action. For them, working through international institutions, or respecting international law, is a sign of weakness. I think they’re wrong. Let me offer just two examples why. In Ukraine, Russia’s recent actions recall the days when Soviet tanks rolled into Eastern Europe. But this isn’t the Cold War. Our ability to shape world opinion helped isolate Russia right away. Because of American leadership, the world immediately condemned Russian actions. Europe and the G-7 joined with us to impose sanctions. NATO reinforced our commitment to Eastern European allies. The IMF is helping to stabilize Ukraine’s economy. OSCE monitors brought the eyes of the world to unstable parts of Ukraine. This mobilization of world opinion and institutions served as a counterweight to Russian propaganda, Russian troops on the border, and armed militias. This weekend, Ukrainians voted by the millions; yesterday, I spoke to their next President. We don’t know how the situation will play out, and there will be grave challenges. But standing with our allies on behalf of international order has given a chance for the Ukrainian people to choose their future. Similarly, despite frequent warnings from the United States, Israel, and others, the Iranian nuclear program steadily advanced for years. But at the beginning of my presidency, we built a coalition that imposed sanctions on the Iranian economy, while extending the hand of diplomacy to the Iranian government. Now, we have an opportunity to resolve our differences peacefully. The odds of success are still long, and we reserve all options to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. But for the first time in a decade, we have a very real chance of achieving a breakthrough agreement – one that is more effective and durable than what would be achieved through the use of force. And throughout these negotiations, it has been our willingness to work through multilateral channels that kept the world on our side. This is American leadership. This is American strength. In each case, we built coalitions to respond to a specific challenge. Now we need to do more to strengthen the institutions that can anticipate and prevent them from spreading. For example, NATO is the strongest alliance the world has ever known. But we are now working with NATO allies to meet new missions – within Europe, where our Eastern allies must be reassured; and also beyond Europe’s borders, where our NATO allies must pull their weight to counter-terrorism, respond to failed states, and train a network of partners. Likewise, the UN provides a platform to keep the peace in states torn apart by conflict. Now we need to make sure that those nations who provide peace-keepers have the training and equipment to keep the peace, so that we can prevent the type of killing we have seen in Congo and Sudan. We are deepening our investment in countries that support these missions. Because having other nations maintain order in their own neighborhoods lessens the need for us to put our own troops in harm’s way. It is a smart investment. It’s the right way to lead. Keep in mind, not all international norms relate directly to armed conflict. In the face of cyber-attacks, we are working to shape and enforce rules of the road to secure our networks and citizens. In the Asia Pacific, we are supporting Southeast Asian nations as they negotiate a code of conduct with China on the South China Sea, and are working to resolve territorial and maritime disputes through international law. That spirit of cooperation must energize the global effort to combat climate change – a creeping national security crisis that will help shape your time in uniform, as we’re called on to respond to refugee flows, natural disasters, and conflicts over water and food. That’s why, next year, I intend to make sure America is out front in a global framework to preserve our planet. You see, American influence is always stronger when we lead by example. We cannot exempt ourselves from the rules that apply to everyone else. We can’t call on others to make commitments to combat climate change if so many of our political leaders deny that it is taking place. It’s a lot harder to call on China to resolve its maritime disputes under the Law of the Sea Convention when the United States Senate has refused to ratify it – despite the repeated insistence of our top military leaders that the treaty advances our national security. That’s not leadership; that’s retreat. That’s not strength; that’s weakness. And it would be utterly foreign to leaders like Roosevelt and Truman; Eisenhower and Kennedy. I believe in American exceptionalism with every fiber of my being. But what makes us exceptional is not our ability to flout international norms and the rule of law; it’s our willingness to affirm them through our actions. That’s why I will continue to push to close GTMO – because American values and legal traditions don’t permit the indefinite detention of people beyond our borders. That’s why we are putting in place new restrictions on how America collects and uses intelligence – because we will have fewer partners and be less effective if a perception takes hold that we are conducting surveillance against ordinary citizens. America does not simply stand for stability, or the absence of conflict, no matter what the price; we stand for the more lasting peace that can only come through opportunity and freedom for people everywhere. Which brings me to the fourth and final element of American leadership: our willingness to act on behalf of human dignity. America’s support for democracy and human rights goes beyond idealism – it’s a matter of national security. Democracies are our closest friends, and are far less likely to go to war. Free and open economies perform better, and become markets for our goods. Respect for human rights is an antidote to instability, and the grievances that fuel violence and terror. A new century has brought no end to tyranny. In capitals around the globe – including some of America’s partners – there has been a crackdown on civil society. The cancer of corruption has enriched too many governments and their cronies, and enraged citizens from remote villages to iconic squares. Watching these trends, or the violent upheaval in parts of the Arab World, it is easy to be cynical. But remember that because of America’s efforts – through diplomacy and foreign assistance, as well as the sacrifices of our military – more people live under elected governments today than any time in human history. Technology is empowering civil society in ways that no iron fist can control. New breakthroughs are lifting hundreds of millions out of poverty. And even the upheaval of the Arab World reflects the rejection of an authoritarian order that was anything but stable, and offers the long-term prospect of more responsive and effective governance. In Egypt, we acknowledge that our relationship is anchored in security interests – from the peace treaty with Israel, to shared efforts against violent extremism. So we have not cut off cooperation with the new government. But we can and will persistently press for the reforms that the Egyptian people have demanded. Meanwhile, look at a country like Burma, which only a few years ago was an intractable dictatorship, hostile to the United States. Thanks to the enormous courage of the people in that country – and because we took the diplomatic initiative – we have seen political reforms opening a once closed society; a movement away from partnership with North Korea in favor of engagement with America and our allies. We are now supporting reform – and badly needed national reconciliation – through assistance and investment; coaxing and, at times, public criticism. Progress could be reversed. But if Burma succeeds, we will have gained a new partner without having fired a shot. In all these cases, we should not expect change to happen overnight. That’s why we form alliances – not only with governments, but with ordinary people. For unlike other nations, America is not afraid of individual empowerment, we are strengthened by it – by civil society and transparency; by striving entrepreneurs and small businesses; by educational exchange and opportunity for women and girls. That’s who we are. That’s what we represent. I saw that throughout my trip to Africa last year. American assistance has made possible the prospect of an AIDS-free generation, while helping Africans care for their sick. We are helping farmers get their products to market, and feeding populations once endangered by famine. We aim to double access to electricity in sub-Saharan Africa, so people are connected to the promise of the global economy. All this creates new partners and shrinks the space for terrorism. Tragically, no American security operation can eradicate the threat posed by an extremist group like Boko Haram. That is why we must focus both on rescuing those girls, but also on supporting Nigerian efforts to educate its youth. Indeed, this should be one of the hard-earned lessons of Iraq and Afghanistan, where our military became the strongest advocate for diplomacy and development. Foreign assistance isn’t an afterthought – something nice to do apart from our national defense. It’s part of what makes us strong. Ultimately, global leadership requires us to see the world as it is, with all its danger and uncertainty. But American leadership also requires us to see the world as it should be – a place where the aspirations of individual human beings matter; where hopes and not just fears govern; where the truths written into our founding documents can steer the currents of history in the direction of justice. And we cannot do that without you. Graduates, you have taken this time to prepare on the quiet banks of the Hudson. You leave this place to carry forward a legacy that no other military in human history can claim. And you do so as part of a team that extends beyond your units or even our Armed Forces. In the course of your service, you will work as a team with diplomats and development experts. You will get to know allies and train partners. You will embody what it means for America to lead. Next week, I will go to Normandy to honor the men who stormed the beaches. And while it is hard for many Americans to comprehend the courage and sense of duty that guided those who boarded small ships, it is familiar to you. At West Point, you define what it means to be a patriot. Three years ago, Gavin White graduated from this Academy. He then served in Afghanistan. Like the soldiers who came before him, he was in a foreign land, helping people he’d never met, putting himself in harm’s way for the sake of his people back home. Gavin lost one of his legs in an attack. I met him last year at Walter Reed. He was wounded, but just as determined as the day that he arrived here. He developed a simple goal. Today, his sister Morgan will graduate. And true to his promise, Gavin will be there to stand and exchange salutes with her. We have been through a long season of war. We have faced trials that were not foreseen, and divisions about how to move forward. But there is something in Gavin’s character, and America’s character, that will always triumph. Leaving here, you carry with you the respect of your fellow citizens. You will represent a nation with history and hope on our side. Your charge, now, is not only to protect our country, but to do what is right and just. As your Commander-in-Chief, I know you will. May God bless you. May God bless our men and women in uniform. And may God bless the United States of America. On behalf of the American people, I congratulate the millions of Afghans who enthusiastically participated in today’s historic elections, which promise to usher in the first democratic transfer of power in Afghanistan’s history and which represent another important milestone in Afghans taking full responsibility for their country as the United States and our partners draw down our forces. We commend the Afghan people, security forces, and elections officials on the turnout for today’s vote –- which is in keeping with the spirited and positive debate among candidates and their supporters in the run-up to the election. These elections are critical to securing Afghanistan’s democratic future, as well as continued international support, and we look to the Afghan electoral bodies to carry out their duties in the coming weeks to adjudicate the results –- knowing that the most critical voices on the outcome are those of Afghans themselves. Today, we also pay tribute to the many Americans –- military and civilian –- who have sacrificed so much to support the Afghan people as they take responsibility for their own future. The United States continues to support a sovereign, stable, unified, and democratic Afghanistan, and we look forward to continuing our partnership with the new government chosen by the Afghan people on the basis of mutual respect and mutual accountability. THE PRESIDENT: Hello, everybody. I just got off the phone with Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Sandy Winnefeld to get the latest report on the situation in Fort Hood. Obviously we’re following it closely. The situation is fluid right now. But my national security team is in close contact with not just the Defense Department but the FBI. They are working with folks on the ground to determine exactly what happened to make sure that everybody is secure. And I want to just assure all of us that we're going to get to the bottom of exactly what happened. Any shooting is troubling. Obviously this reopens the pain of what happened at Fort Hood five years ago. We know these families. We know their incredible service to our country and the sacrifices that they make. Obviously our thoughts and prayers were — are with the entire community. And we are going to do everything we can to make sure that the community at Fort Hood has what it needs to deal with the current situation, but also any potential aftermath. We're heartbroken that something like this might have happened again. And I don't want to comment on the facts until I know exactly what has happened, but for now, I would just hope that everybody across the country is keeping the families and the community at Fort Hood in our thoughts and in our prayers. The folks there have sacrificed so much on behalf of our freedom. Many of the people there have been on multiple tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. They served with valor; they served with distinction. And when they’re at their home base they feel safe. We don't yet know what happened tonight, but obviously that sense of safety has been broken once again. And we're going to have to find out exactly what happened. The Pentagon will undoubtedly have further briefings for you as we get more details about what happened. Thanks, everybody. TRUMP: Wow. Thank you. That’s a lot of people, Phoenix, that’s a lot of people. Thank you very much. Thank you, Phoenix. I am so glad to be back in Arizona. The state that has a very, very special place in my heart. I love people of Arizona and together we are going to win the White House in November. Now, you know this is where it all began for me. Remember that massive crowd also? So, I said let’s go and have some fun tonight. We’re going to Arizona, O.K.? Continue reading the main story  Presidential Election 2016 The latest news and analysis of the candidates and issues shaping the presidential race. Business Since Birth: Trump’s Children and the Tangle That Awaits DEC 4 Trump Backers Go to Court to Block Vote Recounts in 3 States DEC 2 The Trump Transition Reality Show DEC 1 The Far Right Has a New Digital Safe Space NOV 30 Michael Flynn, a Top Trump Adviser, Ties China and North Korea to Jihadists NOV 30 See More » This will be a little bit different. This won’t be a rally speech, per se. Instead, I’m going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today, illegal immigration. I’ve just landed having returned from a very important and special meeting with the president of Mexico, a man I like and respect very much. And a man who truly loves his country, Mexico. And, by the way, just like I am a man who loves my country, the United States. We agree on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs, cash, guns, and people across our border, and to put the cartels out of business. We also discussed the great contributions of Mexican-American citizens to our two countries, my love for the people of Mexico, and the leadership and friendship between Mexico and the United States. It was a thoughtful and substantive conversation and it will go on for awhile. And, in the end we’re all going to win. Both countries, we’re all going to win. This is the first of what I expect will be many, many conversations. And in a Trump administration we’re going to go about creating a new relationship between our two countries, but it’s going to be a fair relationship. We want fairness. But to fix our immigration system, we must change our leadership in Washington and we must change it quickly. Sadly, sadly there is no other way. The truth is our immigration system is worse than anybody ever realized. But the facts aren’t known because the media won’t report on them. The politicians won’t talk about them and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up because they are making an absolute fortune. That’s the way it is. Today, on a very complicated and very difficult subject, you will get the truth. The fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors, political activists and powerful, powerful politicians. It’s all you can do. Thank you. Thank you. Let me tell you who it does not serve. It does not serve you the American people. Doesn’t serve you. When politicians talk about immigration reform, they usually mean the following: amnesty, open borders, lower wages. Immigration reform should mean something else entirely. It should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for American citizens. Thank you. But if we’re going to make our immigration system work, then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and very sensitive issues. For instance, we have to listen to the concerns that working people, our forgotten working people, have over the record pace of immigration and it’s impact on their jobs, wages, housing, schools, tax bills and general living conditions. These are valid concerns expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds, all over. We also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate. Sometimes it’s just not going to work out. It’s our right, as a sovereign nation, to chose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish and love us. Then there is the issue of security. Countless innocent American lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced. I have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanctuary cities and open borders. So many people, so many, many people. So sad. They will be joining me on this stage in a little while and I look forward to introducing, these are amazing, amazing people. Countless Americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this administration and the administration that causes this horrible, horrible thought process, called Hillary Clinton. This includes incredible Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root. The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody and then was released into the U.S., think of it, into the U.S. community under the policies of the White House Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Weak, weak policies. Weak and foolish policies. He was released again after the crime, and now he’s out there at large. Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top student in her class one day before her death. Also among the victims of the Obama-Clinton open-border policy was Grant Ronnebeck, a 21-year-old convenience store clerk and a really good guy from Mesa, Arizona. A lot of you have known about Grant. He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary, who had also been released from federal custody, and they knew it was going to happen again. Another victim is Kate Steinle. Gunned down in the sanctuary city of San Francisco, by an illegal immigrant, deported five previous times. And they knew he was no good. Then there is the case of 90-year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home, 90 years old and defenseless. The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long, who did not meet Obama administration standards for removal. And they knew it was going to happen. In California, a 64-year-old Air Force veteran, a great woman, according to everybody that knew her, Marilyn Pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer. Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never, ever deported, despite the fact that everybody wanted him out. A 2011 report from the Government Accountability Office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens, in our prisons and jails together, had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names, 25,000. On top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion a year. And this is what we get. For the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next 10 years, we could provide one million at-risk students with a school voucher, which so many people are wanting. While there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people, many, many, this doesn’t change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education, who compete directly against vulnerable American workers, and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back. And they’re hurting a lot of our people that cannot get jobs under any circumstances. But these facts are never reported. Instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing and only one thing, the needs of people living here illegally. In many cases, by the way, they’re treated better than our vets. Not going to happen anymore, folks. November 8th. Not going to happen anymore. AUDIENCE: Trump! Trump! Trump! The truth is, the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants or however many there may be — and honestly we’ve been hearing that number for years. It’s always 11 million. Our government has no idea. It could be three million. It could be 30 million. They have no idea what the number is. Frankly our government has no idea what they’re doing on many, many fronts, folks. But whatever the number, that’s never really been the central issue. It will never be a central issue. It doesn’t matter from that standpoint. Anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in Washington. Only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problems facing America — you know this, this is what they talk about, facing American society today is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who don’t have legal status. And, they also think the biggest thing, and you know this, it’s not nuclear, and it’s not ISIS, it’s not Russia, it’s not China, it’s global warming. To all the politicians, donors, and special interests, hear these words from me and all of you today. There is only one core issue in the immigration debate, and that issue is the well being of the American people. Nothing even comes a close second. Hillary Clinton, for instance, talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated, but she’s not talking about the American families who have been permanently separated from their loved ones because of a preventable homicide, because of a preventable death, because of murder. No, she’s only talking about families who come here in violation of the law. We will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity. So important. We will be fair, just, and compassionate to all, but our greatest compassion must be for our American citizens. Thank you. President Obama and Hillary Clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty by surrendering the safety of the American people to open borders, and you know it better than anybody right here in Arizona. You know it. President Obama and Hillary Clinton support sanctuary cities. They support catch and release on the border. They support visa overstays. They support the release of dangerous, dangerous, dangerous, criminals from detention. And they support unconstitutional executive amnesty. Hillary Clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, and her plan will provide Obamacare, Social Security, and Medicare for illegal immigrants, breaking the federal budget. On top of that she promises uncontrolled, low-skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for American workers, and especially for African-American and Hispanic workers within our country. Our citizens. Most incredibly, because to me this is unbelievable, we have no idea who these people are, where they come from. I always say Trojan horse. Watch what’s going to happen, folks. It’s not going to be pretty. This includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees from Syria and that region over a short period of time. And even yesterday, when you were watching the news, you saw thousands and thousands of people coming in from Syria. What is wrong with our politicians, our leaders if we can call them that. What the hell are we doing? Hard to believe. Hard to believe. Now that you’ve heard about Hillary Clinton’s plan, about which she has not answered a single question, let me tell you about my plan. And do you notice... And do you notice all the time for weeks and weeks of debating my plan, debating, talking about it, what about this, what about that. They never even mentioned her plan on immigration because she doesn’t want to get into the quagmire. It’s a tough one, she doesn’t know what she’s doing except open borders and let everybody come in and destroy our country by the way. While Hillary Clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists, my plan was crafted with the input from Federal Immigration offices, very great people. Among the top immigration experts anywhere in this country, who represent workers, not corporations, very important to us. I also worked with lawmakers, who’ve led on this issue on behalf of American citizens for many years. And most importantly I’ve met with the people directly impacted by these policies. So important. Number one, are you ready? Are you ready? We will build a great wall along the southern border. AUDIENCE: Build the wall! Build the wall! Build the wall! And Mexico will pay for the wall. One hundred percent. They don’t know it yet, but they’re going to pay for it. And they’re great people and great leaders but they’re going to pay for the wall. On day one, we will begin working on an impenetrable, physical, tall, power, beautiful southern border wall. We will use the best technology, including above and below ground sensors that’s the tunnels. Remember that, above and below. Above and below ground sensors. Towers, aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels and Mexico you know that, will work with us. I really believe it. Mexico will work with us. I absolutely believe it. And especially after meeting with their wonderful, wonderful president today. I really believe they want to solve this problem along with us, and I’m sure they will. Number two, we are going to end catch and release. We catch them, oh go ahead. We catch them, go ahead. Under my administration, anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country and back to the country from which they came. And they’ll be brought great distances. We’re not dropping them right across. They learned that. President Eisenhower. They’d drop them across, right across, and they’d come back. And across. Then when they flew them to a long distance, all of a sudden that was the end. We will take them great distances. But we will take them to the country where they came from, O.K.? Number three. Number three, this is the one, I think it’s so great. It’s hard to believe, people don’t even talk about it. Zero tolerance for criminal aliens. Zero. Zero. Zero. They don’t come in here. They don’t come in here. According to federal data, there are at least two million, two million, think of it, criminal aliens now inside of our country, two million people criminal aliens. We will begin moving them out day one. As soon as I take office. Day one. In joint operation with local, state, and federal law enforcement. Now, just so you understand, the police, who we all respect — say hello to the police. Boy, they don’t get the credit they deserve. I can tell you. They’re great people. But the police and law enforcement, they know who these people are. They live with these people. They get mocked by these people. They can’t do anything about these people, and they want to. They know who these people are. Day one, my first hour in office, those people are gone. And you can call it deported if you want. The press doesn’t like that term. You can call it whatever the hell you want. They’re gone. Beyond the two million, and there are vast numbers of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled, but their days have run out in this country. The crime will stop. They’re going to be gone. It will be over. They’re going out. They’re going out fast. Moving forward. We will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings if we even have to do that. We will terminate the Obama administration’s deadly, and it is deadly, non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets, walk around, do whatever they want to do, crime all over the place. That’s over. That’s over, folks. That’s over. Since 2013 alone, the Obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into United States communities. These are individuals encountered or identified by ICE, but who were not detained or processed for deportation because it wouldn’t have been politically correct. My plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens immediately. We will restore the highly successful Secure Communities Program. Good program. We will expand and revitalize the popular 287(g) partnerships, which will help to identify hundreds of thousands of deportable aliens in local jails that we don’t even know about. Both of these programs have been recklessly gutted by this administration. And those were programs that worked. This is yet one more area where we are headed in a totally opposite direction. There’s no common sense, there’s no brain power in our administration by our leader, or our leaders. None, none, none. On my first day in office I am also going to ask Congress to pass Kate’s Law, named for Kate Steinle... ... to ensure that criminal aliens convicted of illegal reentry receive strong mandatory minimum sentences. Strong. And then we get them out. Another reform I’m proposing is the passage of legislation named for Detective Michael Davis and Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver, two law enforcement officers recently killed by a previously deported illegal immigrant. The Davis-Oliver bill will enhance cooperation with state and local authorities to ensure that criminal immigrants and terrorists are swiftly, really swiftly, identified and removed. And they will go face, believe me. They’re going to go. We’re going to triple the number of ICE deportation officers. Within ICE I am going to create a new special deportation task force focused on identifying and quickly removing the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in America who have evaded justice just like Hillary Clinton has evaded justice, O.K.? Maybe they’ll be able to deport her. The local police who know every one of these criminals, and they know each and every one by name, by crime, where they live, they will work so fast. And our local police will be so happy that they don’t have to be abused by these thugs anymore. There’s no great mystery to it, they’ve put up with it for years, and now finally we will turn the tables and law enforcement and our police will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess. We’re also going to hire 5,000 more Border Patrol agents. Who gave me their endorsement, 16,500 gave me their endorsement. And put more of them on the border instead of behind desks which is good. We will expand the number of border patrol stations significantly. I’ve had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers, and I want to take a moment to thank them. What they do is incredible. And getting their endorsement means so much to me. More to me really than I can say. Means so much. First time they’ve ever endorsed a presidential candidate. Number four, block funding for sanctuary cities. We block the funding. No more funds. We will end the sanctuary cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths. Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars, and we will work with Congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities. Number five, cancel unconstitutional executive orders and enforce all immigration laws. We will immediately terminate President Obama’s two illegal executive amnesties in which he defied federal law and the Constitution to give amnesty to approximately five million illegal immigrants, five million. (BOOING) And how about all the millions that are waiting on line, going through the process legally? So unfair. Hillary Clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs, including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the United States Supreme Court. Great. Clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty. And by the way, folks, she will be a disaster for our country, a disaster in so many other ways. And don’t forget the Supreme Court of the United States. Don’t forget that when you go to vote on November 8. And don’t forget your Second Amendment. And don’t forget the repeal and replacement of Obamacare. And don’t forget building up our depleted military. And don’t forget taking care of our vets. Don’t forget our vets. They have been forgotten. Clinton’s plan would trigger a constitutional crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before. In effect, she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of Congress in order to write her own laws from the Oval Office. And you see what bad judgment she has. She has seriously bad judgment. (BOOING) Can you imagine? In a Trump administration all immigration laws will be enforced, will be enforced. As with any law enforcement activity, we will set priorities. But unlike this administration, no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement. And ICE and Border Patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs the way their jobs are supposed to be done. Anyone who has entered the United States illegally is subject to deportation. That is what it means to have laws and to have a country. Otherwise we don’t have a country. Our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals, gang members, security threats, visa overstays, public charges. That is those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who’ve come here under this current corrupt administration. Number six, we are going to suspend the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur. According to data provided by the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration, and the national interest between 9/11 and the end of 2014, at least 380 foreign born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the United States. And even right now the largest number of people are under investigation for exactly this that we’ve ever had in the history of our country. Our country is a mess. We don’t even know what to look for anymore, folks. Our country has to straighten out. And we have to straighten out fast. The number is likely higher. But the administration refuses to provide this information, even to Congress. As soon as I enter office I am going to ask the Department of State, which has been brutalized by Hillary Clinton, brutalized. (BOOING) Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put in place. I call it extreme vetting right? Extreme vetting. I want extreme. It’s going to be so tough, and if somebody comes in that’s fine but they’re going to be good. It’s extreme. And if people don’t like it, we’ve got have a country folks. Got to have a country. Countries in which immigration will be suspended would include places like Syria and Libya. And we are going to stop the tens of thousands of people coming in from Syria. We have no idea who they are, where they come from. There’s no documentation. There’s no paperwork. It’s going to end badly folks. It’s going to end very, very badly. For the price of resettling one refugee in the United States, 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region. Which I agree with 100 percent. We have to build safe zones and we’ll get the money from Gulf states. We don’t want to put up the money. We owe almost $20 trillion. Doubled since Obama took office, our national debt. But we will get the money from Gulf states and others. We’ll supervise it. We’ll build safe zones which is something that I think all of us want to see. Another reform involves new screening tests for all applicants that include, and this is so important, especially if you get the right people. And we will get the right people. An ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people. Thank you. We’re very proud of our country. Aren’t we? Really? With all it’s going through, we’re very proud of our country. For instance, in the last five years, we’ve admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from Iraq and Afghanistan. And these two countries according to Pew Research, a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified. That’s what they say. That’s what they say. They’re justified. Right? And we’re admitting them to our country. Applicants will be asked their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities. Attitudes on radical Islam, which our president refuses to say and many other topics as part of this vetting procedure. And if we have the right people doing it, believe me, very, very few will slip through the cracks. Hopefully, none. Number seven, we will insure that other countries take their people back when they order them deported. There are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they’ve been ordered to leave the United States. Including large numbers of violent criminals, they won’t take them back. So we say, O.K., we’ll keep them. Not going to happen with me, not going to happen with me. Due to a Supreme Court decision, if these violent offenders cannot be sent home, our law enforcement officers have to release them into your communities. And by the way, the results are horrific, horrific. There are often terrible consequences, such as Casey Chadwick’s tragic death in Connecticut just last year. Yet despite the existence of a law that commands the secretary of state to stop issuing visas to these countries. Secretary Hillary Clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance. And, they would comply if we would act properly. In other words, if we had leaders that knew what they were doing, which we don’t. The result of her misconduct was the release of thousands and thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home to their countries. Instead we have them all over the place. Probably a couple in this room as a matter of fact, but I hope not. According to a report for the Boston Globe from the year 2008 to 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into U.S. communities because their home countries would not, under any circumstances, take them back. Hard to believe with the power we have. Hard to believe. We’re like the big bully that keeps getting beat up. You ever see that? The big bully that keeps getting beat up. These 13,000 releases occurred on Hillary Clinton’s watch. She had the power and the duty to stop it cold, and she decided she would not do it. (BOOING) And Arizona knows better than most exactly what I’m talking about. Those released include individuals convicted of killings, sexual assaults, and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable. The Boston Globe writes that a Globe review of 323 criminals released in New England from 2008 to 2012 found that as many as 30 percent committed new offenses, including rape, attempted murder, and child molestation. We take them, we take them. (BOOING) Number eight, we will finally complete the biometric entry-exit visa tracking system which we need desperately. For years Congress has required biometric entry-exit visa tracking systems, but it has never been completed. The politicians are all talk, no action, never happens. Never happens. Hillary Clinton, all talk. Unfortunately when there is action it’s always the wrong decision. You ever notice? In my administration we will ensure that this system is in place. And, I will tell you, it will be on land, it will be on sea, it will be in air. We will have a proper tracking system. Approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary visas and then never, ever left. Why should they? Nobody’s telling them to leave. Stay as long as you want, we’ll take care of you. Beyond violating our laws, visa overstays pose — and they really are a big problem — pose a substantial threat to national security. The 9/11 Commission said that this tracking system should be a high priority and would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in August and September 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the United States on expired visas. And you know what that would have meant, what that could have meant. Wouldn’t that have been wonderful, right? What that could have meant. Last year alone nearly half a million individuals overstayed their temporary visas. Removing these overstays will be a top priority of my administration. If people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary visa and never, ever leave, the Obama-Clinton policy, that’s what it is, then we have a completely open border, and we no longer have a country. We must send a message that visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced. Number nine, we will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet. We will ensure that E-Verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and we will work with Congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country. Immigration law doesn’t exist for the purpose of keeping criminals out. It exists to protect all aspects of American life. The work site, the welfare office, the education system, and everything else. That is why immigration limits are established in the first place. If we only enforced the laws against crime, then we have an open border to the entire world. We will enforce all of our immigration laws. And the same goes for government benefits. The Center for Immigration Studies estimates that 62 percent of households headed by illegal immigrants use some form of cash or non-cash welfare programs like food stamps or housing assistance. Tremendous costs, by the way, to our country. Tremendous costs. This directly violates the federal public charge law designed to protect the United States Treasury. Those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for immediate removal. Number 10, we will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers, the forgotten people. Workers. We’re going to take care of our workers. And by the way, and by the way, we’re going to make great trade deals. We’re going to renegotiate trade deals. We’re going to bring our jobs back home. We’re going to bring our jobs back home. We have the most incompetently worked trade deals ever negotiated probably in the history of the world, and that starts with Nafta. And now they want to go TPP, one of the great disasters. We’re going to bring our jobs back home. And if companies want to leave Arizona and if they want to leave other states, there’s going to be a lot of trouble for them. It’s not going to be so easy. There will be consequence. Remember that. There will be consequence. They’re not going to be leaving, go to another country, make the product, sell it into the United States, and all we end up with is no taxes and total unemployment. It’s not going to happen. There will be consequences. We’ve admitted 59 million immigrants to the United States between 1965 and 2015. Many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country. So true. But we now have an obligation to them and to their children to control future immigration as we are following, if you think, previous immigration waves. We’ve had some big waves. And tremendously positive things have happened. Incredible things have happened. To ensure assimilation we want to ensure that it works. Assimilation, an important word. Integration and upward mobility. Within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records. The time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to our legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals. To keep immigration levels measured by population share within historical norms. To select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in U.S. society and their ability to be financially self- sufficient. We take anybody. Come on in, anybody. Just come on in. Not anymore. You know, folks, it’s called a two-way street. It is a two-way street, right? We need a system that serves our needs, not the needs of others. Remember, under a Trump administration it’s called America first. Remember that. To choose immigrants based on merit. Merit, skill, and proficiency. Doesn’t that sound nice? And to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to American workers first. And that in particular African-American and Latino workers who are being shut out in this process so unfairly. And Hillary Clinton is going to do nothing for the African-American worker, the Latino worker. She’s going to do nothing. Give me your vote, she says, on November 8th. And then she’ll say, so long, see you in four years. That’s what it is. She is going to do nothing. And just look at the past. She’s done nothing. She’s been there for 35 years. She’s done nothing. And I say what do you have to lose? Choose me. Watch how good we’re going to do together. Watch. You watch. We want people to come into our country, but they have to come into our country legally and properly vetted, and in a manner that serves the national interest. We’ve been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago. They’re decades and decades old. To avoid this happening in the future, I believe we should sunset our visa laws so that Congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them to bring them up to date. They’re archaic. They’re ancient. We wouldn’t put our entire federal budget on auto pilot for decades, so why should we do the same for the very, very complex subject of immigration? So let’s now talk about the big picture. These 10 steps, if rigorously followed and enforced, will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last 50 years. It’s going to happen, folks. Because I am proudly not a politician, because I am not behold to any special interest, I’ve spent a lot of money on my campaign, I’ll tell you. I write those checks. Nobody owns Trump. I will get this done for you and for your family. We’ll do it right. You’ll be proud of our country again. We’ll do it right. We will accomplish all of the steps outlined above. And, when we do, peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail. Crime will go down. Border crossings will plummet. Gangs will disappear. And the gangs are all over the place. And welfare use will decrease. We will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding America, beginning with our American inner cities. We’re going to rebuild them, for once and for all. For those here illegally today, who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and one route only. To return home and apply for reentry like everybody else, under the rules of the new legal immigration system that I have outlined above. Those who have left to seek entry — Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Those who have left to seek entry under this new system — and it will be an efficient system — will not be awarded surplus visas, but will have to apply for entry under the immigration caps or limits that will be established in the future.TRUMP: We will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration. We will break the cycle. There will be no amnesty. Our message to the world will be this. You cannot obtain legal status or become a citizen of the United States by illegally entering our country. Can’t do it. This declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays, very importantly. People will know that you can’t just smuggle in, hunker down and wait to be legalized. It’s not going to work that way. Those days are over. Importantly, in several years when we have accomplished all of our enforcement and deportation goals and truly ended illegal immigration for good, including the construction of a great wall, which we will have built in record time. And at a reasonable cost, which you never hear from the government. And the establishment of our new lawful immigration system then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those individuals who remain. That discussion can take place only in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, no longer with us, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time. Right now, however, we’re in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis and a terrorism crisis like never before. All energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security. That is the only conversation we should be having at this time, immigration security. Cut it off. Whether it’s dangerous materials being smuggled across the border, terrorists entering on visas or Americans losing their jobs to foreign workers, these are the problems we must now focus on fixing. And the media needs to begin demanding to hear Hillary Clinton’s answer on how her policies will affect Americans and their security. These are matters of life and death for our country and its people, and we deserve answers from Hillary Clinton. And do you notice, she doesn’t answer. She didn’t go to Louisiana. She didn’t go to Mexico. She was invited. She doesn’t have the strength or the stamina to make America great again. Believe me. What we do know, despite the lack of media curiosity, is that Hillary Clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement. Just ask the Border Patrol about Hillary Clinton. You won’t like what you’re hearing. The result will be millions more illegal immigrants; thousands of more violent, horrible crimes; and total chaos and lawlessness. That’s what’s going to happen, as sure as you’re standing there. This election, and I believe this, is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration and reform our laws to make your life better. I really believe this is it. This is our last time. November 8. November 8. You got to get out and vote on November 8. It’s our last chance. It’s our last chance. And that includes Supreme Court justices and Second Amendment. Remember that. So I want to remind everyone what we’re fighting for and who we are fighting for. I am going to ask — these are really special people that I’ve gotten to know. I’m going to ask all of the “Angel Moms” to come join me on the stage right now. These are amazing women. These are amazing people. AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA! I’ve become friends with so many. But Jamiel Shaw, incredible guy, lost his son so violently. Say just a few words about your child. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My son Ronald da Silva (ph) was murdered April 27, 2002 by an illegal alien who had been previously deported. And what so — makes me so outrageous is that we came here legally. Thank you, Mr. Trump. I totally support you. You have my vote. TRUMP: Thank you, thank you. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): God bless you. TRUMP: You know what? Name your child and come right by. Go ahead. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Laura Wilkerson. And my son was Joshua Wilkerson. He was murdered by an illegal in 2010. And I personally support Mr. Trump for our next president. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name is Ruth Johnston Martin (ph). My husband was shot by an illegal alien. He fought the good fight but he took his last breath in 2002. And I support this man who’s going to change this country for the better. God bless you. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name Maureen Maloney (ph), and our son Matthew Denise (ph) was 23 years old when he was dragged a quarter of a mile to his death by an illegal alien, while horrified witnesses were banging on the truck trying to stop him. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Our son Matthew Denise, if Donald Trump were president in 2011, our son Matthew Denise and other Americans would be alive today. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Thank you. My name is Kathy Woods (ph). My son Steve (ph), a high school senior, 17 years old, went to the beach after a high school football game. A local gang came along, nine members. The cars were battered to — like war in Beirut. And all I can say is they murdered him and if Mr. Trump had been in office then the border would have been secure and our children would not be dead today. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Hi. My name is Brenda Sparks (ph), and my son is named Eric Zapeda (ph). He was raised by a legal immigrant from Honduras only to be murdered by an illegal in 2011. His murderer never did a second in handcuffs or jail. Got away with killing an American. So I’m voting for trump. And by the way, so is my mother. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name is Dee Angle (ph). My cousin Rebecca Ann Johnston (ph), known as Becky, was murdered on January the 1st, 1989 in North Little Rock, Arkansas. Thank you. And if you don’t vote Trump, we won’t have a country. Trump all the way. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Shannon Estes (ph). And my daughter Shaley Estes (ph), 22 years old, was murdered here in Phoenix last July 24 by a Russian who overstayed his visa. And vote Trump. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Mary Ann Mendoza, the mother of Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, who was killed in a violent head-on collision in Mesa. Thank you. I want to thank Phoenix for the support you’ve always given me, and I want to tell you what. I’m supporting the man who will — who is the only man who is going to save our country, and what we our going to be leaving our children. (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Steve Ronnebeck, father of Grant Ronnebeck, 21 years old. Killed January 22, 2015 by an illegal immigrant who shot him in the face. I truly believe that Mr. Trump is going to change things. He’s going to fight for my family, and he’s going to fight for America. TRUMP: These are amazing people, and I am not asking for their endorsement, believe me that. I just think I’ve gotten to know so many of them, and many more, from our group. But they are incredible people and what they’re going through is incredible, and there’s just no reason for it. Let’s give them a really tremendous hand. That’s tough stuff, I will tell you. That is tough stuff. Incredible people. So, now is the time for these voices to be heard. Now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf. Now is the time for all of us as one country, Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative to band together to deliver justice, and safety, and security for all Americans. Let’s fix this horrible, horrible, problem. It can be fixed quickly. Let’s our secure our border. Let’s stop the drugs and the crime from pouring into our country. Let’s protect our social security and Medicare. Let’s get unemployed Americans off the welfare and back to work in their own country. This has been an incredible evening. We’re going to remember this evening. November 8, we have to get everybody. This is such an important state. November 8 we have to get everybody to go out and vote. We’re going to bring — thank you, thank you. We’re going to take our country back, folks. This is a movement. We’re going to take our country back. Thank you. Thank you. This is an incredible movement. The world is talking about it. The world is talking about it and by the way, if you haven’t been looking to what’s been happening at the polls over the last three or four days I think you should start looking. You should start looking. TRUMP: Thank you, thank you. Great, wow. Thank you very much. Thank you, wow. Thank you, wow. AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA! TRUMP: Thank you, everybody. Nice place, plenty of room. In 25 days we’re going to win the state of North Carolina, which I love, and we’re going to win the White House. TRUMP: Early voting starts on October 20th, so you have to get out there. But November 8th, that’s our day. November 8th, right? November 8th. But do the early voting. I’d also like to take this moment to send our thoughts and prayers to everyone recovering in the tragic aftermath of Hurricane Matthew. We know about it very well unfortunately right here. We send our deepest condolences for those who have lost loved ones. We are with you and we will always be with you and help you when needed. So, good luck to everybody. The incredible spirit of the people of this state will power its recovery, and it’s the same spirit that will rebuild our nation. I have property in this state, this is a great state. You know my property. Beautiful properly, great employees. In the Trump administration we will end decades of policies that enrich special interests and foreign countries at our expense. We’re going to take on the big media, big business, and big donors that are bleeding our country dry. We’re losing our jobs. We’re going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals and illegal immigration. Stop the massive inflow of refugees. Take care of our vets, our great vets. And we’re going to repeal and replace Obamacare, 100 percent. That is a disaster. Premiums are soaring double digits in North Carolina, beyond anybody’s wildest expectations. It’s a disaster and you’re — and you know what’s going on. Your country will be left with only one insurer. You’re going to have nothing, everyone’s leaving. And you have one insurer. You’re going to have nobody. Obamacare if failing, we’re going to repeal it and we’re going to replace it. Your jobs come back under a Trump administration. Your income goes up under a Trump administration. Your taxes go way down under a Trump administration. You companies won’t be leaving our country under a Trump administration, they’ll be staying right here. And believe me, there are plenty of them right now negotiating to leave, I hate to tell you that. These are the issues that we’ll discuss at the next debate, which I look very much forward to. Crooked Hillary is doing no more public events until after the debate. They say she’s doing debate prep but, really she’s just resting, she’s resting. AUDIENCE: Lock her up! Lock her up! Lock her up! TRUMP: For what — for what she’s done, they should lock her up, they should. It’s disgraceful. Honestly, it’s disgraceful. What’s going on in our country right now is a disgrace. The Hillary Clinton documents released by WikiLeaks make more clear than ever just how much is at stake on November the 8th. WikiLeaks released new Clinton campaign e-mails revealing how friendly Hillary was with the attorney general, Loretta Lynch. This was only months prior to Lynch’s investigation of Hillary’s illegal secret e-mail server that gave foreign governments access to our confidential information. TRUMP: This comes on the heels of disclosure that Clinton campaign was conspiring and colluding with the State Department and Justice Department over the release of her e-mails and the investigation into her server. Hillary Clinton told the FBI 39 times she couldn’t remember anything. I couldn’t remember, I couldn’t remember. Or recall key events concerning illegal server and related misconduct. Now, in new written testimony, just out as part Freedom of Information Act request, Hillary Clinton said she couldn’t remember, recall, or anything else, key events and key things 21 different times. (BOOING) It’s one more reason that if I win I will ask my Attorney General to appoint a special prosecutor. And we also have to investigate the investigation itself. Hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 e-mails after a congressional subpoena. She got a subpoena from Congress and she said, this is no good, this is terrible, because those 33,000 e-mails had bad stuff. And she said get rid of them, delete them, bleach them. Nobody bleaches because that’s an expensive process. She bleached. Get rid of them. And then she made everybody get rid of iPhones, her iPhones, and some of them were hammered. They were hammered to death. All to cover up her crimes. Yesterday new disclosures were made showing again how Hillary Clinton’s pay for play works. Saudi Arabia paid Bill Clinton a lot of money to make a speech and then got an arms deal from Hillary and her State department that they were unable to get. The nation of Qatar also kicked in $1 million for Bill Clinton’s birthday party, so nice. But, as WikiLeaks showed the Clinton’s ripped off the people of Haiti as they were suffering and dying after the earthquake. And her brother’s on the board of a gold mine, her brother. But, the media’s covering up for the Clintons and their many crimes against so many people. The WikiLeaks documents show how the media conspires and collaborates with the Clinton campaign including giving the questions and answers to Hillary Clinton before the debate, OK. (BOOING) What a rigged system folks. Last night, we had a massive crowd of over 20,000 people in Cincinnati, filled up an arena. And the media won’t even talk about the size of the crowd, the enthusiasm of the crowd. I watched NBC this morning, they said, last night Donald Trump was in Cincinnati. If Hillary Clinton has 800 people, the crowd is so big. (LAUGHTER) It is horrible — it is really horrible. The corrupt media is trying to do everything in their power to stop our movement. Believe me, they don’t want this happening. We have one of the great movements — we have the great movement. We have a movement that’s never happened before. TRUMP: And no paper is more corrupt than the failing New York Times. The good news is it is failing, it won’t be around too much longer. But they are really, really bad people. The largest shareholder in the Times is Carlos Slim. Now Carlos Slim, as you know, comes from Mexico. He’s given many millions of dollars to the Clintons and their initiatives. So Carlos Slim, largest owner of the paper, from Mexico. Reporters at the New York Times, they’re not journalists, they’re corporate lobbyists for Carlos Slim and for Hillary Clinton. We’re going to let foreign corporations and their CEO’s decide the outcomes of the — you just can’t do this. We can’t let this happen. We are not going to let it happen where they decide the outcome of our elections. They can’t do it and we’re not going to let it happen. This is our last chance to save our country and reclaim it for we the people, and it’s going to happen. Oh, it’s going to happen. As you have seen, right now I am being viciously attacked with lies and smears. (BOOING) It’s a phony deal. I have no idea who these women are, have no idea. I have no idea. And I think you all know I have no idea because you understand me for a lot of years, OK? When you looked at that horrible woman last night, you said I don’t think so. I don’t think so. Whoever she is, wherever she comes from, the stories are total fiction. They’re 100 percent made up, they never happened, they never would happen. I don’t think they’d happen with very many people but they certainly aren’t going to happen with me. Folks, you know my people always say, oh don’t talk about it, talk about jobs, talk about the economy. Don’t worry, your jobs are going to be coming back to North Carolina like you’ve seen, the economy’s going to be good. But I feel I have to talk about them because you have to dispute when somebody says something. And fortunately we have the microphone, we’re able to dispute, some people can’t. These are lies being pushed by the media and the Clinton campaign to try and keep their grip on our country. They are all false, they’re totally invented, fiction. All 100 percent totally and completely fabricated. Never met this person, these people, I don’t know who they are. I don’t know who they — think of what’s happening to our country. Think of what’s happening. I don’t know who these people are, I look on television, I think it’s a disgusting thing and it’s being pushed. They have no witnesses, there’s nobody around. They just come out. Some are doing it for probably a little fame, they get some free fame. It’s a total setup. Now suddenly after many, many years, phony accusers come out less than a month before one of the most important elections in the history of our country. It also comes at a time as WikiLeaks unveils horrible, horrible things about Hillary Clinton. But they’d rather talk about this. Somebody that you’ve never seen that said, oh, 1992 he went like this. (LAUGHTER) One came out recently where I was sitting alone in some club. I really don’t sit alone that much. Honestly, folks I don’t think I sit alone. I go in with groups of people — I was sitting alone by myself, like this. (LAUGHTER) TRUMP: And then I went whaw. (LAUGHTER) To somebody. I just heard this one. It’s like, it’s like unbelievable. Even a simple investigation would’ve shown these allegations against me, in just about all cases, it’s nonsense, it’s false. And eyewitnesses already debunked to a People Magazine story. Here’s my question about the dishonest writer from People Magazine. Why didn’t she write what she said happened before we wrote the story, why didn’t she put it in the story? The story would’ve been one of the big stories. I was the big star of the Apprentice, why didn’t she go it 12 years ago? Twelve years ago. She’s writing a story — no think of this. Think of this. She’s right, she’s a liar. She is a liar. She’s writing a story — check our her Facebook page, you’ll understand. Hey, she’s writing a story about a beautiful love story, Melania, Donald, and she said I made inappropriate move. Now, just so you understand. That’s a big story. If I did. She wrote the most beautiful story, honestly the most beautiful story, 100 percent story, like beautiful. Why wouldn’t she have put this into the story? Now, two nights ago I get a call. Oh, People Magazine’s doing a story. It’s OK. No, no, it’s not OK, it’s about a story that was written 12 years ago. She was on last night, or one of the top people that People was on, and he said, no, we were just informed of it. Well, did you hear about it 12 years ago? Did you hear about five years? No, no, we never — we just heard about it recently. These people are sick. These people are sick. And the reason she didn’t write it 12 years ago is very simple. It never happened, it never happened. It’s a lie. It’s a lie. And let me tell you, if it did happen, if it did happen, it — 100 percent she would have written it, it would have been the biggest story of the year, OK? These are all horrible lies, all fabrications and we can’t let them change the most important election in our lifetimes. If five percent of the people think it’s true and maybe 10 percent think — we don’t win. In other words, they make lies. They have people come around, oh Donald Trump did this or that. I never saw these people before, I don’t know who they are. And then you watch these phony networks, and dishonest networks, who are 100 percent — let me tell you something about Hillary Clinton. She’s got nothing going, she’s got nothing. The only thing she’s got going is the media. She’s got nothing going. She’s got nothing. The other day at the debate, where by the way, I absolutely destroyed her, OK? Every online poll, even Time Magazine, Time Magazine is not exactly in love with me but every online poll had us skill (ph) — she said, the other day I’m standing, I told you this. But I’m standing at my podium and she walks in front of me, right? She walks in front of me, you know? And when she walked in front of me, believe me I wasn’t impressed. But she walks in front of me and she takes a question, then she walked back, and that was the end of that, no problem. TRUMP: Then she said the next day, I invaded her space. Give me a break. And I was waiting for that because she had that incident once before where they made up something. Some guy invaded her space, the poor guy lost the election because of it. But I was very conscious of this so I purposely, I purposely didn’t do anything. So — get this guy out of here. Get him out of here, out. Get out of here. (BOOING) AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA! TRUMP: It’s really total disrespect for the American flag. There he is. Look, good. Great. Folks — folks, that’s what’s happening to our country, that’s what’s happening. That is total disrespect for our flag, that’s what’s happening to our country. We’re going to turn it around, folks — we’re going to turn it around. So — so, just to finish up — so just to finish up, you see what’s happening. The process is rigged. This whole election is being rigged. These lies, spread by the media, without witnesses, without backup or anything else (inaudible) body makes an accusation that you did something, and you weren’t — you never saw this person before. It’s a lie, total lie, it’s fabrication. Sometimes they do it for fame, maybe they get money, who knows? The Clinton campaign is pushing it. The New York Times did a story on somebody where it was totally false. They knew it was totally false. We gave them the information, they wrote a whole big page about somebody where they were sending me e-mails, and letters, and everything, and then you realize — it was a one-way send, by the way, there was nothing sent back — and you realize it was a totally phony deal. They did a whole big story on it. They didn’t mention all of the e-mails, they didn’t mention everything coming my way. And others looked at it and, as bad as it was, soon as they saw this stuff that was said, they immediately — immediately decided not to do this. The New York Times did a story on it. They read these stories and people might not know how untrue they are. It’s really a disgrace. I’ve been saying this for a long time. The whole thing we’ve been going through, and I hate to say it but, the whole thing we’re going through — Bernie Sanders was a rigged deal — the whole thing is one big fix, it’s one big fix. It’s one big ugly lie, it’s one big fix. The press can’t write the kind of things they write, which are lies, lies, lies. The stories are fabrications and false. And the only thing I say is hopefully, hopefully, our patriotic movement will overcome this terrible deception. TRUMP: Hopefully, our great movement — and there’s never been anything like this in the United States. And the only way they figure they can throw it down is to come up with people that are willing to say, I was with Donald Trump in 1980. I was sitting with him on an airplane, and he went after me on the plane. Yeah, I’m going to go after. (LAUGHTER) Believe me, she would not be my first choice, that I can tell you. Man. (LAUGHTER) You don’t know, that would not be my first choice. Hopefully our great movement powered by everyday citizens will overcome the sickness that is plaguing our politics and our media. And I’ll tell you what, our media is indeed sick and its making our country sick, and we’re going to stop it. We’re going to stop it folks. All right, let’s get on now, let’s get onto another subject. But isn’t it good that we talk about this? Right? Who thinks I shouldn’t talk, we’re talk jocks (ph), right? Who thinks that I shouldn’t talk about it? Does anybody think that? OK, I agree. When somebody, you know, a long time ago – when you get hit, you hit back, you’ve got to do it. You don’t just say “I didn’t get hit, oh I didn’t get hit.” When you get hit, we are destroying our country with these sick people back there, and they know it better than anybody in this arena. (BOOING) I ran because I knew what trouble our country was in. The country is in tremendous trouble, you know this. You know this in North Carolina, because you see what’s happening to your jobs, they’re disappearing. I know it’s not about me, it’s about you, and that’s why I’m doing this. I didn’t need to do this, but it’s about you. It’s about bringing our country, making our country great again. I’m taking these slings and arrows for you, so we can have our borders, so we can get back our jobs… …so we can be a safe nation again. You know, the murder – the number of murders in our country this year, went up more than they have in 45 years. (UNKNOWN): (OFF-MIKE) TRUMP: It’s true (ph). Look, Obama is an incompetent. He is an incompetent president. He doesn’t know what he’s doing, he’s out campaigning all day long, he talking about me like he knows me. I don’t know him, he doesn’t know me. And why doesn’t some woman maybe come up and say what they say falsely about me, they could say about him. They could say it about anybody, they could say it about anybody. I’ll tell you what, he better be careful, because they could say it about anybody, anybody at all. But Obama is in incompetent, as a president, he’s about as bad as it gets. Look at what’s happening, how Iran is taunting us. Look at what’s going on, look at the world. He gives away $400 million in cash, but it turns out to $1.7 billion in cash. Gives them $150 billion… (BOOING) This guys doesn’t know what he’s doing, it’s an embarrassment. If you look at the Middle East, it’s a blow up, it’s a total disaster. We have an incompetent president. I hate to say it, but it 100 percent true. And all he’s doing, instead of working on your jobs and your companies leaving for Mexico and other places, he’s campaigning for crooked Hillary. That’s all he does. (BOOING) Either we win this election or we’re going to lose our country, because 4 more years of Obama, you can’t take it. TRUMP: WikiLeaks documents, Hillary Clinton speaking in secret – oh man, you saw those too (ph), a secret Brazilian bank. Hillary Clinton said “my dream is a hemisphere common market with open trade and open borders.” There go the rest of your jobs – (BOOING) There go (ph) – even though she doesn’t say that, but that’s what she said in a very, very secret meeting. The e-mails show that behind closed doors speaking to these international bankers, Hillary Clinton’s pledged to destroy the sovereignty of the United States. A Trump administration will secure and defend our borders than you’ve ever (inaudible). And yes, we will build a wall. Crooked Hillary also wants a 550 percent increase in Syrian refugees to pour into our country (ph). (BOOING) And that’s (inaudible) Obama numbers and those are thousands and thousands (inaudible). This – even though she admitted it private, according to WikiLeaks, again, nobody is covering WikiLeaks. They’re covering somebody that I never saw before, that she knows terrorists are trying to infiltrate the refugee program. So you have terrorists coming in, she knows they’re coming in, and yet she wants to increase it. AUDIENCE: Trump! Trump! Trump! Trump! Trump! TRUMP: And our country will never be the same. So let me state this as clearly as I can. I am going to keep radical Islamic terrorists the hell out of our country. At the same time, we’re going to take care of our military and we’re going to take care of our great, great, great veterans. They’ve been treated very badly. That includes – veterans’ choice so veterans can either attend a public V.A. facility or if they have to wait online like they’ve been doing, sometimes for as much as seven days and then still not get proper care, they’ll go to a private medical center or they’ll go to a private or public or something, they will go outside… …they’ll go to a private doctor, they’ll go to a private hospital, they’ll go to a public hospital. We’re going to get them care and we’re going to pay for their – that care. They’re not going to wait online (ph). For seven days and die sometimes waiting online for a simple, simple procedure or prescription. It’s not going to happen like that any longer for our veterans, OK? Not going to happen. And Hillary Clinton said, no, no, the V.A. is doing a good job, OK? (BOOING) North Carolina is home to more than 100,000 active-duty military personnel and almost 800,00 veterans. The military supports over half a million jobs in this state. We are going to repeal the Obama-Clinton defense sequester and we are going to rebuild the military of the United States which is very, sadly, depleted. TRUMP: When it comes to keeping America safe, I believe in a three and – I think you believe in these words, I think – three very important words, peace through strength, right. Peace through strength. And we don’t want to use our strength, but you have to have our strength. And the world is laughing at us. They’re laughing at the stupidity of our President. Remember he drew the line in the sand — the line is in the sand. Remember Hillary the last debate? I wasn’t Secretary of State then. She doesn’t even know. It turned out she lied. Remember she said TPP was gold standard, she said she never said that during the debate. She lied about that. She’s a liar. But to be a strong country, we must also be a very rich country. At the center of our economic revival we’ll be fixing our really horrendous, one-way street, horrible trade deals. We’re going to fix them folks. You know, last year we lost almost $800 billion in trade deficits. We have trade deficit with other nations of almost $800 billion. And I have some friends in the audience, I guarantee I can take any one of those friends – one in particular who happens to be brutal but that’s OK, lives in North Carolina, so you know, one of those things, right, but a great business person. I put him in charge – this case him – we would have such a good thing. And there are people like that. We have the greatest negotiators in the world, we have the greatest business people in the world, we don’t use them. We use political hacks. So we have a trade deficit of almost $800 billion. Sad, isn’t it? Isn’t it pathetic? North Carolina’s industrial (ph) workers have been crushed by Bill Clinton’s signing of NAFTA supported by crooked Hillary. Don’t forget, a lot of people want that to happen because they make a lot of money by taking money out of this country. Those deals are very good for a lot of people. A lot of people know – everybody knows that NAFTA is no good for the United States, but it’s good for their wallets in some cases. You’ve lost nearly half of your manufacturing jobs since NAFTA, did you know that? You’ve lost almost half of your manufacturing jobs. This region used to be the furniture manufacturing hub of the world. I know because I bought plenty. But the NAFTA deal and then China’s entry into the World Trade Organization, another Bill and Hillary backed disaster, have sent those jobs to other countries. You know better than anybody. I used to be here a lot for furniture, gets smaller and smaller every year. Not going to have anything left pretty soon. We’re living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world. Our jobs have been stolen from us and we have people that don’t know what they are doing, in particular our leadership. If I win, day one, we are going to announce our plans to renegotiate NAFTA. If we don’t get the deal we want, we leave NAFTA and start over to get a much better, a much more fair deal because right now, we’re a one-way highway into Mexico, a one-way highway (ph). TRUMP: I mean, you take a look at this, it’s one way. They get the jobs, they get the factories, they get the cash, and all we get – we get illegal immigration and we get drugs. And the drugs are poisoning our youth, the drugs are poisoning our youth and others. But we’re getting the drugs and we’re getting lots of problems. And I’ll tell you, I was endorsed by the, as you know, by ICE just last week, and by the border patrol agents. Sixteen thousand five hundred Border Patrol. They’ve never — they’ve never done this before. They’ve never done — they’ve never endorsed a presidential candidate. Both groups endorsed me. Because we’re going to have strong borders. And we’re going to have people come into our country, but they’re going to come in legally, legally. And we’re going to stand up to China, we’re going to stop their currency manipulation and product dumping, which is killing us. And they don’t follow the rules and, if they don’t, we’re going to institute tariffs. When they send something into our country — and, believe me, they’re going to obey our rules so quickly, you have no idea. And we’ll end up with a better relationship with China than we do now. Look what they’re doing, they’re building a massive fortress against everything. A massive fortress in the South China Sea. And yet they’re ripping us off. Now, if they’re going to rip us off, you wouldn’t think they’d be building fortresses. They have no respect for our President — which I can understand that — they have no respect for Obama, they have no respect for our country, and they’re getting away with murder. And we have the cards, we have the cards. We have all the cards. Because we’re like the piggy bank that everybody keeps stealing from. But pretty soon we’re not going to be piggy bank anymore. We’re going to be the opposite of the piggy bank. We don’t have — we are $20 trillion, half of which came during the Obama years. And yet we didn’t fix anything. Our roads are bad, our bridges are bad, our tunnels are bad, our schools are bad, our hospitals are bad. We’re going to start making things again in America. As part of our plan to bring back our jobs, we’re going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 tax, the biggest since Ronald Reagan. Wages will rise, jobs will return, and factories will come rushing, rushing back in to our country. We’re also going to fix our inner cities. Forty-five percent of African-American children are — under the age six — are living in poverty. Think of it, 45 percent. Fifty-eight percent of African- American youth don’t have jobs. More than 3,000 people have been shot in Chicago since the beginning of the year. Three thousand people since January, three thousand. It’s like a war zone. Violent crime in Greensboro increased by 25 percent last year. Did you know that? Twenty-five percent. To those African-Americans suffering in our country, I say, what do you have to lose? Vote for Trump, I’m going to fix it. What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose? I will fight harder for you than anyone has fought for you before. Here are some of the more amazing things we’re going to do when we take over, hopefully, this incredible country and run it properly in 2017. We going to have the biggest tax cut since Ronald Reagan, we’re going to eliminate job-killing regulations which are a disaster, we are going to defend religious liberty. We’re going to end Common Core. Going to bring our education local. We’re going to support the men and women of law enforcement, repeal and replace Obamacare. We are going to save our Second Amendment. TRUMP: We’re going to appoint great justices to the United States Supreme Court to uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States. So you have 25 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true. But to beat the system, you have to pound the pavement, get your friends and co-workers out, organize your neighbors and fight for the country you want. On November 8th, the arrogance of Washington, D.C. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the American voter, it’s time, all right? I am asking all Americans, Republicans, Independents and Democrats, to join us in our campaign to defeat the corrupt establishment and give our government back to the people. It’s going to happen. I’m going to fight for every citizen of every background. Thank you. AUDIENCE: Trump! Trump! Trump! TRUMP: Thank you. So we’re going to fight and we’re going to fight for every stretch of this nation. And I’m going to fight to bring us all together, we’re a divided nation. Very divided nation right now. We’re going to be unified nation, a nation of love. Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one God saluting one American flag. You’re going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life, and we’re having a good time. We’re having a good time. You’re going to remember this day. This is a movement like nobody’s ever seen in this country before. Even our enemies admit that. We’re going to make history together, you’re going to look back at the election, on November 8th, and you’re going to say it is the most important vote you’ve ever cast because that’s when our country started working again. That’s when our country — — became safe again. That’s when our country became strong again and rich again. And we will make America, just like your beautiful hat, we will make America great again. Thank you, thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much everybody. Thank you everybody. God bless you, go out and vote November 8th. Together we can save American lives, American jobs, and American futures. Together we can save America itself. Join me in this mission, we’re going to make America great again. Thank you. I love you. God bless you, everybody. God bless you. God bless you, thank you. Against all odds, polls, and projections, Donald Trump claimed victory in the presidential election Tuesday, delivering a speech at the Hilton Hotel in New York City on Tuesday to a cheering crowd of supporters. It was an unexpected outcome for the Republican candidate, who beat out not only a stacked GOP primary field but also an even more formidable opponent in Hillary Clinton, who was consistently ahead of him in the polls up and in a much stronger position on the electoral map. Not to mention the fact that Trump has been mired in scandals and gaffes throughout the election. More than a dozen women have accused him of sexual assault after a hot mic tape revealed him bragging about “grabbing” women by the genitals; he has made vague insinuations connecting President Obama and Clinton to terrorism groups; he led a campaign built on wild inaccuracies and vague to nonexistent policy proposals; and he built his campaign on divisive anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim rhetoric, garnering even the support of white nationalists. Despite all this, however, Trump managed to strike a chord with the American people as an unorthodox candidate without a political background, selling a call for a Southern border wall, a temporary ban on Muslim immigrants, and his strong opposition to trade deals, among his other bombastic talking points. All the worry over Trump’s possible refusal to concede the election is now moot. He is the one who got to accept Clinton’s concession. Below Vox will publish a rush transcript of his speech in full. [Editor’s note: The transcript may have missing words or phrases.] Thank you. Thank you very much, everyone. Sorry to keep you waiting. Complicated business, complicated. Thank you very much. I've just received a call from Secretary Clinton. She congratulated us. It’s about us. On our victory, and I congratulated her and her family on a very, very hard-fought campaign. I mean, she fought very hard. Hillary has worked very long and very hard over a long period of time, and we owe her a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country. I mean that very sincerely. Now it is time for America to bind the wounds of division, have to get together. To all Republicans and Democrats and independents across this nation, I say it is time for us to come together as one united people. It is time. I pledge to every citizen of our land that I will be president for all of Americans, and this is so important to me. For those who have chosen not to support me in the past, of which there were a few people, I'm reaching out to you for your guidance and your help so that we can work together and unify our great country. As I've said from the beginning, ours was not a campaign but rather an incredible and great movement, made up of millions of hard-working men and women who love their country and want a better, brighter future for themselves and for their family. It is a movement comprised of Americans from all races, religions, backgrounds, and beliefs, who want and expect our government to serve the people, and serve the people it will. Working together, we will begin the urgent task of rebuilding our nation and renewing the American dream. I've spent my entire life in business, looking at the untapped potential in projects and in people all over the world. That is now what I want to do for our country. Tremendous potential. I've gotten to know our country so well. Tremendous potential. It is going to be a beautiful thing. Every single American will have the opportunity to realize his or her fullest potential. The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer. We are going to fix our inner cities and rebuild our highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals. We're going to rebuild our infrastructure, which will become, by the way, second to none, and we will put millions of our people to work as we rebuild it. We will also finally take care of our great veterans who have been so loyal, and I've gotten to know so many over this 18-month journey. The time I've spent with them during this campaign has been among my greatest honors. Our veterans are incredible people. We will embark upon a project of national growth and renewal. I will harness the creative talents of our people, and we will call upon the best and brightest to leverage their tremendous talent for the benefit of all. It is going to happen. We have a great economic plan. We will double our growth and have the strongest economy anywhere in the world. At the same time, we will get along with all other nations willing to get along with us. We will be. We will have great relationships. We expect to have great, great relationships. No dream is too big, no challenge is too great. Nothing we want for our future is beyond our reach. America will no longer settle for anything less than the best. We must reclaim our country's destiny and dream big and bold and daring. We have to do that. We're going to dream of things for our country, and beautiful things and successful things once again. I want to tell the world community that while we will always put America's interests first, we will deal fairly with everyone, with everyone. All people and all other nations. We will seek common ground, not hostility; partnership, not conflict. And now I would like to take this moment to thank some of the people who really helped me with this, what they are calling tonight a very, very historic victory. First, I want to thank my parents, who I know are looking down on me right now. Great people. I've learned so much from them. They were wonderful in every regard. Truly great parents. I also want to thank my sisters, Marianne and Elizabeth, who are here with us tonight. Where are they? They're here someplace. They're very shy, actually. And my brother Robert, my great friend. Where is Robert? Where is Robert? My brother Robert, and they should be on this stage, but that's okay. They're great. And also my late brother Fred, great guy. Fantastic guy. Fantastic family. I was very lucky. Great brothers, sisters, great, unbelievable parents. To Melania and Don and Ivanka and Eric and Tiffany and Barron, I love you and I thank you, and especially for putting up with all of those hours. This was tough. This was tough. This political stuff is nasty, and it is tough. So I want to thank my family very much. Really fantastic. Thank you all. Thank you all. Lara, unbelievable job. Unbelievable. Vanessa, thank you. Thank you very much. What a great group. You've all given me such incredible support, and I will tell you that we have a large group of people. You know, they kept saying we have a small staff. Not so small. Look at all of the people that we have. Look at all of these people. And Kellyanne and Chris and Rudy and Steve and David. We have got tremendously talented people up here, and I want to tell you it's been very, very special. I want to give a very special thanks to our former mayor, Rudy Giuliani. He's unbelievable. Unbelievable. He traveled with us and he went through meetings, and Rudy never changes. Where is Rudy. Where is he? [Chanting "Rudy"] Gov. Chris Christie, folks, was unbelievable. Thank you, Chris. The first man, first senator, first major, major politician — let me tell you, he is highly respected in Washington because he is as smart as you get. Sen. Jeff Sessions. Where is Jeff? A great man. Another great man, very tough competitor. He was not easy. He was not easy. Who is that? Is that the mayor that showed up? Is that Rudy? Up here. Really a friend to me, but I'll tell you, I got to know him as a competitor because he was one of the folks that was negotiating to go against those Democrats, Dr. Ben Carson. Where's been? Where is Ben? By the way, Mike Huckabee is here someplace, and he is fantastic. Mike and his familiar bring Sarah, thank you very much. Gen. Mike Flynn. Where is Mike? And Gen. Kellogg. We have over 200 generals and admirals that have endorsed our campaign and there are special people. We have 22 Congressional Medal of Honor people. A very special person who, believe me, I read reports that I wasn't getting along with him. I never had a bad second with him. He's an unbelievable star. He is — that's right, how did you possibly guess? Let me tell you about Reince. I've said Reince. I know it. I know it. Look at all of those people over there. I know it, Reince is a superstar. I said, they can't call you a superstar, Reince, unless we win it. Like Secretariat. He would not have that bust at the track at Belmont. Reince is really a star and he is the hardest-working guy, and in a certain way I did this. Reince, come up here. Get over here, Reince. Boy, oh, boy, oh, boy. It's about time you did this right. My god. Nah, come here. Say something. [Reince Priebus: Ladies and gentlemen, the next president of the united States, Donald Trump! Thank you. It's been an honor. God bless. Thank God.] Amazing guy. Our partnership with the RNC was so important to the success and what we've done, so I also have to say, I've gotten to know some incredible people. The Secret Service people. They're tough and they're smart and they're sharp and I don't want to mess around with them, I can tell ya. And when I want to go and wave to a big group of people and they rip me down and put me back down in the seat, but they are fantastic people so I want to thank the Secret Service. And law enforcement in New York City, they're here tonight. These are spectacular people, sometimes under appreciated unfortunately. We appreciate them. So it's been what they call an historic event, but to be really historic, we have to do a great job, and I promise you that I will not let you down. We will do a great job. We will do a great job. I look very much forward to being your president, and hopefully at the end of two years or three years or four years or maybe even eight years you will say so many of you worked so hard for us, with you. You will say that — you will say that that was something that you were — really were very proud to do and I can — thank you very much. And I can only say that while the campaign is over, our work on this movement is now really just beginning. We're going to get to work immediately for the American people, and we're going to be doing a job that hopefully you will be so proud of your president. You will be so proud. Again, it's my honor. It's an amazing evening. It's been an amazing two-year period, and I love this country. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you to Mike Pence. Wow. What a group. What a group. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, folks. Thank you, folks. It's great to be right here in Florida, which we love. In 26 days, we are going to win this great, great state and we are going to win the White House.  POLITICS A List Of The Accusations About Trump's Alleged Inappropriate Sexual Conduct  POLITICS TRANSCRIPT: Michelle Obama's Speech On Donald Trump's Alleged Treatment Of Women Our movement is about replacing a failed and corrupt — now, when I say "corrupt," I'm talking about totally corrupt — political establishment, with a new government controlled by you, the American people. There is nothing the political establishment will not do — no lie that they won't tell, to hold their prestige and power at your expense. And that's what's been happening. The Washington establishment and the financial and media corporations that fund it exist for only one reason: to protect and enrich itself. The establishment has trillions of dollars at stake in this election. As an example, just one single trade deal they'd like to pass involves trillions of dollars, controlled by many countries, corporations and lobbyists. For those who control the levers of power in Washington, and for the global special interests, they partner with these people that don't have your good in mind. Our campaign represents a true existential threat like they haven't seen before. This is not simply another four-year election. This is a crossroads in the history of our civilization that will determine whether or not we the people reclaim control over our government. The political establishment that is trying to stop us is the same group responsible for our disastrous trade deals, massive illegal immigration and economic and foreign policies that have bled our country dry. The political establishment has brought about the destruction of our factories, and our jobs, as they flee to Mexico, China and other countries all around the world. Our just-announced job numbers are anemic. Our gross domestic product, or GDP, is barely above 1 percent. And going down. Workers in the United States are making less than they were almost 20 years ago, and yet they are working harder. But so am I working harder, that I can tell you. It's a global power structure that is responsible for the economic decisions that have robbed our working class, stripped our country of its wealth and put that money into the pockets of a handful of large corporations and political entities. Just look at what this corrupt establishment has done to our cities like Detroit; Flint, Michigan; and rural towns in Pennsylvania, Ohio, North Carolina and all across our country. Take a look at what's going on. They stripped away these town bare. And raided the wealth for themselves and taken our jobs away out of our country never to return unless I'm elected president. The Clinton machine is at the center of this power structure. We've seen this first hand in the WikiLeaks documents, in which Hillary Clinton meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of U.S. sovereignty in order to enrich these global financial powers, her special interest friends and her donors. So true. Honestly, she should be locked up. Should be locked up. And likewise the e-mails show that the Clinton machine is so closely and irrevocably tied to the media organizations that she, that she — listen to this — is given the questions and answers in advance of her debate performance with Bernie Sanders. Hillary Clinton is also given approval and veto power over quotes written about her in the New York Times. They definitely do not do that to me, that I can tell you. And the e-mails show the reporters collaborate and conspire directly with the Clinton campaign on helping her win the election all over. With their control over our government at stake, with trillions of dollars on the line, the Clinton machine is determined to achieve the destruction of our campaign, not gonna to happen. Which has now become a great, great movement, the likes of which our country has never seen before, never ever. They've never seen a movement like this in our country before. Yesterday in Florida, massive crowds, people lined up outside of big arenas, not able to get in. Never happened before. It's one of the phenomenas — it's one of the great political phenomenas. The most powerful weapon deployed by the Clintons is the corporate media, the press. Let's be clear on one thing, the corporate media in our country is no longer involved in journalism. They're a political special interest no different than any lobbyist or other financial entity with a total political agenda, and the agenda is not for you, it's for themselves. And their agenda is to elect crooked Hillary Clinton at any cost, at any price, no matter how many lives they destroy. For them it's a war, and for them nothing at all is out of bounds. This is a struggle for the survival of our nation, believe me. And this will be our last chance to save it on Nov. 8, remember that. This election will determine whether we are a free nation or whether we have only the illusion of democracy, but are in fact controlled by a small handful of global special interests rigging the system, and our system is rigged. This is reality, you know it, they know it, I know it, and pretty much the whole world knows it. The establishment and their media enablers will control over this nation through means that are very well known. Anyone who challenges their control is deemed a sexist, a racist, a xenophobe, and morally deformed.  POLITICS NPR Battleground Map: Trump In Crisis  POLITICS A Complete Guide To Early And Absentee Voting They will attack you, they will slander you, they will seek to destroy your career and your family, they will seek to destroy everything about you, including your reputation. They will lie, lie, lie, and then again they will do worse than that, they will do whatever is necessary. The Clintons are criminals, remember that. They're criminals. This is well documented, and the establishment that protects them has engaged in a massive cover-up of widespread criminal activity at the State Department and the Clinton Foundation in order to keep the Clintons in power. Never in history have we seen such a cover-up as this, one that includes the total destruction of 33,000 e-mails, 13 iPhones – some by hammer – laptops, missing boxes of evidence, and many, many other things. People who are capable of such crimes against our nation are capable of anything. And so now we address the slander and libels that was just last night thrown at me by the Clinton machine and the New York Times and other media outlets, as part of a concerted, coordinated and vicious attack. It's not coincidence that these attacks come at the exact same moment, and all together at the same time as WikiLeaks releases documents exposing the massive international corruption of the Clinton machine, including 2,000 more e-mails just this morning. These vicious claims about me of inappropriate conduct with women are totally and absolutely false. And the Clintons know it, and they know it very well. These claims are all fabricated. They're pure fiction and they're outright lies. These events never, ever happened and the people said them meekly fully understand. You take a look at these people, you study these people, and you'll understand also. The claims are preposterous, ludicrous, and defy truth, common sense and logic. We already have substantial evidence to dispute these lies, and it will be made public in an appropriate way and at an appropriate time very soon. These lies come from outlets whose past stories and past claims have already been discredited. The media outlets did not even attempt to confirm the most basic facts because even a simple investigation would have shown that these were nothing more than false smears. Six months ago, the failing New York Times wrote a massive story attacking me, and the central witness they used said the story was false; that she was quoted inaccurately. She said that I was a great guy. She had great courage, I'll be honest with you. She was an amazing person. And never made those remarks — that I was a great guy, and never made the remarks. And when I read the story, I was sort of surprised — how could she say that? And she didn't say it. We demanded a retraction but, they refused to print it, just like they refused to pin the comments from another source who praised me in her book, or the words of another wonderful woman who said really nice things about me. They put other statements that she didn't say, they misrepresented. The story was a fraud and a big embarrassment to The New York Times and it was a big front page story. Front page, center, color picture, a disgrace. They were very embarrassed; it will be part of the lawsuit we are preparing against them. Now, today the same two discredited writers, who should've been fired from The New York Times for what they did, tell another totally fabricated and false story, that supposedly took place on an airplane more than 30 years ago. Another ridiculous tale, no witnesses, no nothing. Then, there was a writer from People Magazine, who wrote a story on Melania and myself on our first anniversary. The story was beautiful. It was beautiful. It was lovely. But last night we hear that after 12 years — this took place 12 years ago, this story — a new claim that I made inappropriate advances during the interview to this writer. And I asked very simple question, why wasn't it part of the story that appeared 20 or 12 years ago? Why wasn't it a part of the story? Why didn't they make it part of the story? I was one of the biggest stars on television with The Apprentice and I would've been one of the biggest stories of the year. Think of it, she's doing this story on Melania, who was pregnant at the time. And Donald Trump, our one year anniversary, and she said I made inappropriate advances, and by the way, the area was a public area, people all over the place. Take a look, you take a look. Look at her, look at her words. You tell me, what you think. I don't think so. I don't think so. But, it is amazing, doing a story — a love story — on how great we are together — and by the way, we're stronger today than we ever were before, which is good, but it's a love story. It's a love story on our one year. And if I did that, she would've added that it would've been the headline. And who would've done that if you're doing this and you're one of the top shows on television. These people are horrible people. They're horrible, horrible liars. And interestingly, it happens to appear 26 days before our very important election, isn't that amazing? This invented account has already been debunked by eyewitnesses who were there. They were there. The very witness identified by the author has said the story is totally false. By the way, this is a room that everybody can see in. It's got glass walls. It's at Mar-A-Lago. It's got glass walls. Can you believe this? Why wasn't it in the story, biggest story of the year? This weekend, The New York Times published a full-page hit piece with another claim from an individual who has been totally discredited based on the many, many, many e-mails and letters she has sent to our office over the years, looking for work, Donald is great, wanting go to my rallies. But The New York Times — and this was full op-ed piece — refused to use the evidence that we presented, refused to use it. If they used it, if they would have looked, they would have said, there's no story here. Others in the media, which almost surprises me because they're dishonest also, were presented with the story by this woman numerous times, and they got very excited. But, after seeing the evidence that we immediately give them, all of them refused to write the story. There was no story. The Times, though, didn't want to see it. They just wrote the story. And this was a full page opposite the editorials. This is part of a concerted effort, led by The New York Times and others. Now The New York Times is fighting desperately for its relevance and its financial survival. And it probably won't even be around in a few years, based on its financial outlook, which wouldn't be a bad thing, if you want to know the truth. But, as it winds down its years and is becoming more and more problematic, it's gotten more and more vicious, more and more vile. And even the other mainstream media is talking about the single greatest pile-on in history, and all between now and Nov. 8. And you have to see the stories they've written, it's one after another, after another, and facts mean nothing, third-rate journalism. The great editors of the past from The New York Times and others, ladies and gentlemen, are spinning in their grave. I will not allow the Clinton machine to turn our campaign into a discussion of their slanders and lies, but, will remain focused on the issues facing the American people.  POLITICS Trump Takes 'Shackles' Off, On The Trail And On Twitter  POLITICS 'We Are Better Than That': Clinton Sees An Opening In Voters Turned Off By Trump Thank you, thank you. But, let me state this as clearly as I can, these attacks are orchestrated by the Clintons and their media allies. The only thing Hillary Clinton has going for herself is the press, without the press, she is absolutely zero. And you saw that the other night in the debate, where some people said she made virtually a fool of herself. This is not presidential material, believe me. What they say is false and slanderous in virtually every respect. We are now less than a month from the most election of our lifetime. Indeed one of the most important elections in the history of our country. And the polls are showing us in a dead heat. Don't believe what you say. The new, highly respected Rasmussen poll just came out this morning. Just released. Shows up nationally 2 points ahead, Trump. Beautiful. Just came out. So now the Clinton machine has put forward a small handful of people out of tens of thousands of people over the years that I've met, that I've worked with, that I've employed, in order to make wild and false allegations that fail to meet even the most basic test of common sense. Not even common sense. Again, this is nothing more than an attempt to destroy our movement and for the Clintons to keep their corrupt control over our government. When I declared my candidacy, I knew what bad shape our country was in. And believe me, all you have to do is look at world events. All you have to do is look at the $1.7 billion that we sent to Iran in cash – in cash. All you have to do is see the way ISIS was created in the vacuum left by Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama out of Iraq. All you have to do, all you have to do, is look at the 800 people that were very, very not good for our nation. They were going to be deported. Lo and behold, instead of being deported, they were made citizens of the United States just recently. And lo and behold, sadly, the 800 people is wrong. It turned out to be close to 1,800 people. Our president is incompetent. All he wants to do is campaign, and the last thing he wants to happen is to have Donald Trump terminate Obamacare and do all of the other things that are destroying ... He's led a very divided nation and it's only gotten worse. And the last thing our country needs is four more years of Barack Obama, believe me. I've seen firsthand the corruption and the sickness that has taken over our politics. You've seen it and I've seen it and we're all watching together. They knew they would throw every lie they could at me and my family and my loved ones. They knew they would stop at nothing to try to stop me. But I never knew as bad as it would be. I never knew it would be this vile, that it would be this bad, that it would be this vicious. Nevertheless, I take all of these slings and arrows gladly for you. I take them for our movement so that we can have our country back. Our great civilization, here in America and across the civilized world has come upon a moment of reckoning. We've seen it in the United Kingdom, where they voted to liberate themselves from global government and global trade deal, and global immigration deals that have destroyed their sovereignty and have destroyed many of those nations. But, the central base of world political power is right here in America, and it is our corrupt political establishment that is the greatest power behind the efforts at radical globalization and the disenfranchisement of working people. Their financial resources are virtually unlimited, their political resources are unlimited, their media resources are unmatched, and most importantly, the depths of their immorality is absolutely unlimited. They will allow radical Islamic terrorists to enter our country by the thousands. They will allow the great Trojan horse — and I don't want people looking back in a hundred years and 200 years and have that story be told about us because we were led by inept, incompetent and corrupt people like Barack Obama and like Hillary Clinton. We don't want to be part of that history. And by the way, President Obama should stop campaigning and start working on creating jobs, start working on getting our GDP up, start working on strengthening our borders. The corrupt political establishment is a machine, it has no soul. I knew these false attacks would come. I knew this day would arrive; it's only a question of when. And I knew the American people would rise above it and vote for the future they deserve. The only thing that can stop this corrupt machine is you. The only force strong enough to save our country is us. The only people brave enough to vote out this corrupt establishment is you, the American people. We are going to have a policy: America first. They control incredibly, the Department of Justice. And they even secretly meet with the Attorney General of the United States. In the back of her airplane, while on the runway — remember he was there — he was going to play golf. Oh, oh gee, there's the Attorney General. Let me go say hello — plane's on the runway. Let me go say hello to the Attorney General. He never got to play golf, I understand. And it was Arizona, a place I love, but the weather was about a hundred and some odd degrees — he's not gonna play. He was never there to play golf, folks, don't be foolish. They met for 39 minutes and most likely it was to discuss her reappointment, in a Clinton administration, as the Attorney General, just prior to making a decision over whether or not to prosecute Hillary Clinton, okay? That's what happened. That's called real life and that's pretty sad. They met for 39 minutes. Remember he said, we talked golf and we talked about our grandchildren. Three minutes for the grandchildren, two minutes for the golf, then they sat there and they twiddled their thumbs. Now I believe they talked about her remaining in her position under a crooked Hillary Clinton administration. That's what I believe. That's what I believe folks. That's what I believe and I think that's what most people in this room believe. Likewise, they've essentially corrupted the Director of the FBI to the point at which stories are already saying that the great — and they are truly great — men and women who work for the FBI are embarrassed and ashamed of what he's done to one of our truly great institutions, the FBI itself. Hillary Clinton is guilty of all the things that Director Comey stated at his press conference and Congressional hearings and far more. He stated many things, but it's far more and he knows that. And yet, after reading all of these items, where she's so guilty, he let her off the hook. While other lives, including General Petraeus and many others, have been destroyed for doing far, far less. This is a conspiracy against you, the American people, and we cannot let this happen or continue. This is our moment of reckoning as a society and as a civilization itself. I didn't need to do this, folks, believe me — believe me. I built a great company and I had a wonderful life. I could have enjoyed the fruits and benefits of years of successful business deals and businesses for myself and my family. Instead of going through this absolute horror show of lies, deceptions, malicious attacks — who would have thought? I'm doing it because this country has given me so much, and I feel so strongly that it's my turn to give back to the country that I love. Many of my friends and many political experts warned me that this campaign would be a journey to hell – said that. But they're wrong. It will be a journey to heaven, because we will help so many people that are so desperately in need of help. In my former life, I was an insider as much as anybody else. And I knew what it's like, and I still know what it's like to be an insider. It's not bad. It's not bad. Now I'm being punished for leaving the special club and revealing to you the terrible things that are going on having to do with our country. Because I used to be part of the club, I'm the only one that can fix it. I'm doing this for the people and for the movement, and we will take back this country for you and we will make America great again. The corrupt establishment knows that we are a great threat to their criminal enterprise. They know that if we win, their power is gone, and it's returned to you, the people, will be. The dark clouds hanging over our government can be lifted and replaced with a bright future. But it all depends on whether we let the corrupt media decide our future or whether we let the American people decide our future. If this Clinton campaign of destruction is allowed to work, then no other highly success — and this is so true, I mean I've seen this so many times, and I've heard this all of my life, I've heard it all of my life. If we let this happen, then no other highly-successful person, which is what our country needs — it needs a certain thinking. When you look at our trade deals that are so bad, when you look, as an example, on trade, we're going to lose almost $800 billion this year, trade deficit, almost $800 billion. Our debt has doubled in seven and a half years to almost $20 trillion, under Obama. No other successful person, after watching this, and no other very successful person will ever again, ever — and who can blame them? Even me, I'd say, you're right — will ever again run for office. I've heard it for years, if you're very successful, you can't run for high office, especially for President. I said, I don't care, I don't care. I've done so many deals, I've done so well. It's a certain mindset that we need in our country, at least for a period of time. We have to straighten our country out. I will not lie to you. These false attacks are absolutely hurtful. To be lied about, to be slandered, to be smeared so publicly, and before your family that you love, is very painful. What is going on is egregious beyond any words. People that know the story, people that see the story, people that know the facts, they can't even believe it. It's reprehensible beyond description, it's totally corrupt. But, I also know that it's not about me. It's about all of you and it's about our country. I know that. I fully understand that. That's why I got involved. It's about all of us together as a country. It's a movement the likes of which we have never in history in this country seen before, never in history. Even the pundits, even the media — that truly dislikes Donald Trump for their own reasons — will admit this is a movement the likes of which people have never seen before. And it's a movement about the veterans who need medical care, the mothers who've lost their beloved children to terrorism and to crime. It's about the inner cities and the border towns who desperately need our help. It's about the millions of jobless people in America. It's about the American workers who can't get jobs because our jobs have left for Mexico and so many other countries. This election is about the people being crushed by Obamacare. And it's about defeating ISIS and appointing a Supreme Court and a Supreme Court Justice —- it could be four or five — who will defend and protect our Constitution. This election is also about, so importantly to me, African-American and Hispanic-American people whose communities have been plunged into crime, poverty and failing schools by the policies of crooked Hillary Clinton. Believe me, she's crooked. They've robbed these citizens of their future and, if we win, I will give them their hope, their jobs, their education. I will give them their security back. The inner cities, education is almost worthless, it's horrible. We're going to have Common Core ended. We're going to bring education local. But, you look at the inner cities and you see bad education, no jobs, no safety. You walk to the grocery store with your child and you get shot. You walk outside to look and see what's happening and you get shot. In Chicago, 3,000 people have been shot since Jan. 1. We're not going to let that happen. Our inner cities are almost at an all-time low, run by the Democrats for sometimes more than a hundred years, chain unbroken. So they have no jobs. They have horrible education. They have no safety or security and I say to the African-American community, what the hell do you have to lose? I will fix it. I will fix it. I will make it good. I'll bring back our jobs. We'll have good education. We'll have great safety in the inner city. And we will help the Hispanic-American people, who have been treated so badly and so unfairly in our nation, we will help them. I will deliver like you've never seen before. I deliver. Whether people like Donald Trump or not, they all say he delivers. Vote for Donald Trump. You're going to see something and you'll be so happy. You'll be so thrilled. This election is about every man, woman and child in our country who deserves to live in safety, prosperity and peace, so true. We will rise above the lies, the smears, the ludicrous slanders from ludicrous and very, very dishonest reporters. We will vote for the country we want. We will vote for the future we want. We will vote for the politics we want and we will vote to put this corrupt government cartel out of business and out of business immediately. We will vote for the special interests and say lots of luck, but you're being voted out of power. They've betrayed our workers, they've betrayed our borders and, most of all, they've betrayed our freedoms. We will save our sovereign rights as a nation. We will end the politics of profit. We will end the rule of special interests. We will end the raiding of our jobs by other countries. We will end the total disenfranchisement of the American voter and the American worker. Our Independence Day is at hand, and it arrives finally on Nov. 8. Join me in taking back our country and creating a bright, glorious, and prosperous new future for our people. We will make America great again, and it will happen quickly. God bless you. God bless you. Thank you. Thank you. Trump Risks Showdown with China After Call with Taiwan; Chinese Officials Talk to White After Trump's Taiwan Call; Young, In Love, Radicalized; FBI: OSU Attack Possibly Inspired By ISIS, Al Qaeda; Jury Says It's Deadlocked In Fatal Police Shooting; Slager Jury Yet To Reach Verdict, Returns Monday. Aired 8-9p ET Aired December 2, 2016 - 20:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [20:00:01] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening. Thanks for joining us. We begin tonight with breaking news. Even before taking office, the president-elect of the United States of America has in one phone call potentially changed more than three decades of U.S. diplomatic practice. Today, Donald Trump spoke on the phone with president of Taiwan, a highly unusual move that could have tremendous implications for U.S. diplomacy. Trump tweeted a short time ago, "The president of Taiwan called me today to wish me congratulations on winning the presidency. Thank you." CNN global affairs correspondent Elise Labott joins me now with the latest. So, this call between President-elect Trump today and Taiwan's president, why is it such a big deal? I mean, I think to a lot of people listening tonight they will think well, OK. So what? ELISE LABOTT, CNN GLOBAL AFFAIRS CORRESPONDENT: Well, Anderson, the U.S. broke off relations in 1979 because of what they called the One China Policy. China considers Taiwan part of China, and when U.S. deals in diplomatic relations with Taiwan, the Chinese feel they should be dealing with China. The U.S. has held to that for the last 40 years. They are unofficial contacts. There is trade with Taiwan. But this is something that the Chinese are very sensitive about. Even when the U.S. and Chinese officials, when Taiwanese officials speak, it's under cover. They don't meet in public. Nothing is announced. And so, this is sure to rile China, certainly. And, you know, obviously, there's a lot of uncertainty about how Donald Trump is going to approach China. He's talked about tougher policy towards China. And this call kind of all fits into the fact that the Chinese are very worried about what could be a very different policy under President Trump. COOPER: Were the White House, the State Department, were they aware that this call was going to happen? LABOTT: Not at all. And this is really fitting in that President- elect Trump has done. The State Department is ready to provide, kind of, briefing paper, backgrounds, to give the president-elect a briefing on some of the sensitivities of this. Certainly, if the State Department and the White House would notified beforehand, they would recommend against it because of the sensitivities with China. And, you know, this is part of the thing. President-elect Trump has done very few intelligence briefings. He hasn't had any briefings by the State Department. And you have seen over the last week, a lot of these calls with the world leaders, these are supposed to be really congratulatory calls, where they're very perfunctory, very quick, thank you for my congratulations. Looking forward to working with you. You just saw yesterday, the call with the prime minister of Pakistan in which President-elect Trump was talking about what a fantastic country it is. How he can't wait to visit. How he's ready to solve any problems that they want. This didn't take into account the tensions between the U.S. and Pakistan over Pakistan's failure to crack down on terrorism. So, the fact that he's not having these briefings seems to be not only a diplomatic breach of protocol in some instances, but also could have potential consequences down the road. COOPER: So, just to be clear. When was the last time a U.S. leader has even spoken with a Taiwanese leader? Because there are no formal ties between the two countries. LABOTT: Well, in 1979, when the U.S. and Taiwan broke off diplomatic relations. So, this really is upending four decades of U.S. foreign policy. But the idea that the U.S. would be closer, have closer relations with Taiwan is not really unprecedented. I've been talking with some former diplomats who follow Taiwan. And they say that when an incoming Republican administration is taking office, there is an effort to try to elevate the relationship with Taiwan over China. Ronald Reagan invited a Taiwanese delegation to his inauguration. So, it's not unprecedented. But these diplomats say that the relationship with China is really too important for this to go much further -- Anderson. COOPER: Elise Labott, appreciate the reporting. We're just getting word about the potential response from China. CNN White House correspondent Michelle Kosinski joins me on the phone with more on that. So, what have you heard, Michelle? MICHELLE KOSINSKI, CNN WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT (via telephone): Yes, that is how quick this happened, that a call was made. There was reach-out from the Chinese government to the U.S. We don't know the details of that call. We don't expect to get it. What the White House is saying is they confirm that China has already reached out, but they don't want to get into diplomatic discussions. So, how deep this discussion went, we're not sure at this point. But it's very telling how quickly this happened. I mean, as soon as we knew about this call between Donald Trump and Taiwan, before we even knew the details. And he's now tweeting that it was they who reached out to him. That is how quickly China was reaching out to the U.S. What the White House has been saying is kind of a very, very careful response. That it is committed to the One China Policy as Elise was saying. And she also mentioned the Pakistan call. I mean, you know, the Pakistani government readout the call with Donald Trump and directly quoted him as saying to the prime minister, "You are a terrific guy. [20:05:05] You have a very good reputation. You are doing amazing work, which is visible in every way." I mean, highly unusual to see a readout like that in a phone call from the president-elect. So what the White House responded to that with was that, you know, again very diplomatically, very carefully, not wanting to criticize Trump for saying, you know, President Obama has been benefitted -- and I'm read directly from the White House response here -- has benefitted from the professionalism and expertise of career diplomats at the State Department. They were able to offer him good advice about engaging with world leaders. Every president has benefitted from that advice. And I think that President Trump would certainly benefit from it in the same way. COOPER: Interesting. Michelle Kosinski. I appreciate the reporting. Shortly before airtime, I spoke with Donald Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Kellyanne, can you offer clarity on this phone call, President-elect Trump had apparently with the president of Taiwan? Do you know what was discussed? KELLYANNE CONWAY, DONALD TRUMP'S CAMPAIGN MANAGER: So, publicly, I would just like to say whatever is in the readout and what's been publicly disclosed is really the only thing I'll have to say on the matter, Anderson. COOPER: I mean, you know, the reason I'm asking as you well know, the U.S. doesn't recognize Taiwan as its own nation. There's obviously strong unofficial relationship. The U.S. views Taiwan a part of China, doesn't support Taiwan independence. U.S. president hasn't apparently spoken to a leader of Taiwan since 1979. I think there is a tweet now from the Democratic Senator Chris Murphy said these are major pivots in foreign policy without any plan. That is how wars start. Does -- I mean -- can you say if this does signal some sort of a shift in the president-elect's, you know, strategy vis-a-vis China or Taiwan? CONWAY: Well, it sounds like Senator Murphy's tweet is pretty incendiary and does not signal much of a shift from what seen to be the doctrinaire Democratic response to the election results. I mean, this is how wars are starting and it is a major policy shift because you get a phone call? That is pretty negative and pretty presumptuous. COOPER: But there is a widespread belief that this -- I mean, this is something which China takes very seriously, and, you know, this has been long-standing U.S. policy towards China not to recognize Taiwan. CONWAY: Right. And again, I can't discuss anything beyond what's been publicly said, and I won't do that. I mean, this is the president-elect. This will be his administration. He'll be commander in chief and he'll be president of the United States imminently now, and he either will disclose or not disclose the full contents of that conversation. But he's well aware of what U.S. policy has been. COOPER: There have been questions raised about the briefing materials president elect Trump has used with phone calls with world leaders, whether or not he's used State Department briefing booklets and information and the expertise of the people in the State Department that's been available to him. Can you confirm if -- if he did consult that before this phone call? CONWAY: I can confirm that he has access to those materials and he has access to daily briefings, he has access to other information that comes to him from official government agencies and elsewhere. COOPER: Does he use it though? CONWAY: Of course, he uses it. He reads everything. And the guy -- he's the busiest guy on the planet, pretty much has been for a while now. But the president-elect is fully engaged, puts in -- just pours the time in, has talked -- he and Vice President-elect Pence have talked to probably about 45 or 50 leaders now or met them. He's talked to probably 80 people or so as advisors, folks who are offering their counsel, their experiences, their vision. He takes information given to him and provided to him. He avails himself of any number of different information sources, including those that come from the State Department, including those that come from intelligence briefings. COOPER: So, is there -- I mean, just in terms of how it works, is there a policy before talking to a world leader or the president of Taiwan that he would be briefed by the State Department? Or that he would make sure to, you know, be fully up on U.S./Taiwan's unofficial relations? CONWAY: You are presuming that he's not. And I don't remember any discussions ever being asked about President Obama or president elect Obama I think eight years ago at this time. COOPER: Well, he's never spoken to the president of Taiwan. I mean, it is the first time. So, it is news. That's why I'm asking. CONWAY: Sure. As president-elect, I'm pretty certain that President Obama spoke to world leaders in preparation for taking over as president of the United States and commander-in-chief and I can't imagine if he was asked properly or fully briefed considering he had very little experience himself. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: But this is a break with U.S. policy. I mean, this is uncharted waters. Not since, you know, for decades. CONWAY: Anderson, President-elect Trump is fully briefed and fully knowledgeable about these issues, on an ongoing basis, regardless of who's on the other end of the phone. [20:10:05] COOPER: How is the structure right now in the transition? Where would -- you know, where is the discussion coming from of whom he should be having phone calls with? How does that actually work? CONWAY: Well, that just works in an orderly fashion. It's a matter of the executive committee. A matter of the president-elect, the vice president-elect, other advisors to the transition, making suggestions and we're happy to schedule the calls and it is very orderly. We make sure that there's plenty of time for these phone calls, that there's proper briefings. And so far, they've just gone really well in terms of dozens and dozens of phone calls and a few meetings by world leaders by Vice President-elect Pence and President-elect Trump all the while being sensitive to the fact we have a current president and current vice president still in office. He at least is having these private conversation, giving a readout here and there about them. But not trying to make policy and not trying to make waves until he's actually the president in six and a half weeks. COOPER: I mean, I guess that is the question whether a phone call with the president of Taiwan, which is a major shift in U.S. policy or, you know, just happened to have that direct contact is in fact making waves. There is another piece of CNN reporting. A different administration official says there was no contact with either the White House or the State Department about the call beforehand. Request you confirm that? CONWAY: I can't confirm that. But I tell you, yesterday, there was a major shift in policy in that Donald Trump and Mike Pence went to Indianapolis and helped Carrier broker a deal that kept 1100 employees here. Why is that relevant? Because that's a major shift in policy. The current president could have done that. The current vice president could have done that. They just did not do that. And this is -- you see these major shifts in policy. Taiwan is different than that certainly. But I can't confirm particular intimate details of phone calls that are being had between the president-elect and world leaders. I just won't do it. COOPER: And, obviously, we did a lot of reporting on that yesterday, particularly, as well as both President-elect Trump and Vice President-elect Pence, their thank you -- to the beginning of their self described thank you tour. Just finally, can you comment on the Pakistan government released what they said was a readout of the phone call between President-elect Trump and Pakistan's prime minister. It was a one-sided readout. It was allegedly what Donald Trump had said. Not what the Pakistan prime minister had said. Was that accurate? And does it? I mean it was very unconventional for Pakistan to do that. It was a brave protocol. Was that something which was concerning to the president-elect? CONWAY: Well, we refer to anything like that is done you get the full benefit of the entire conversation to the extent that both sides had agreed to a readout. But again, he's having these phone calls. He's having these meetings. He will do that again, as president, with world leaders, certainly, as well Vice President Pence. But in the meantime, you know, beyond what is publicly disclosed, I just cannot disclose anything further than that. It would be highly inappropriate for any of us to do that. So, I'm going to have to stick with that. I can talk about a lot of aspect of the transition. I can talk about many aspects of the campaign manager forum in Harvard last night. I can talk about a number of different policies that the president-elect is very focused on his first 100 days when he gets to Washington. But I can't and I won't disclose any further details on private conversations, let alone private conversations that the president-elect is having with world leaders. COOPER: Kellyanne Conway, appreciate you being with us. Thank you. CONWAY: Thank you. (END VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: I continued to ask Kellyanne Conway some questions about that Harvard symposium from yesterday. We're putting the full interview online at AC360.com. Much more ahead on the implications of the president-elect breaking with U.S. diplomatic practice. I'll speak with Fareed Zacharia and Ivan Watson about why even a phone call to the president of Taiwan is, in fact, a big deal. That's next. And later, an incredible story from Mississippi State University. A young couple in love recruited by ISIS. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:17:57] COOPER: The breaking news tonight, President-elect Donald Trump has broken with nearly four decades of U.S. diplomatic policy, speaking on the phone with the president of Taiwan. Now, the transition team says the two leaders congratulate each other and one of four phone calls Trump had with world leaders today. But the conversation with Taiwan's president in particular obviously isn't just any casual phone call. It has potential for enormous diplomatic implications. A senior administration official says China already has reached out to the White House about the call, but we don't have more details than that. Joining me now are CNN world affairs analyst Fareed Zakaria and CNN senior international correspondent Ivan Watson. So, Fareed, put this into perspective. I mean, I've been reading Twitter. There's a lot of people are saying, look, so what? This is phone call. Sure, it is a diplomatic break. It's not the tradition. But does it really matter? FAREED ZAKARIA, CNN HOST, FAREED ZAKARIA GPS: It is a huge break, with 37 years of diplomatic tradition. The United States does not really recognize Taiwan as a country. It has not recognized, it has allowed for a certain kind of constructive ambiguity. COOPER: We don't have an embassy there. We remove the embassy ZAKARIA: Right. Henry Kissinger's phrase is constructive ambiguity. We don't completely buy the Chinese argument that this is all one country. But the really worrying thing about is, is Donald Trump winging this? Or is it part of a sustained policy that makes sense that has been thought through? If it's the latter, fine, let's understand what the policy is. Let's understand the pluses and minuses are. You know, Kellyanne Conway said the president elect is having private conversation with world leaders. Well, the president-elect and the president don't get to have private conversations really with anyone. There is historically always been a government official, a State Department note taker who is recording what is happening to make sure, first of all, that it is there for history. But also to make sure that the rest of the government knows what's going on. COOPER: Even if the conversations are not released publicly. ZAKARIA: Right. They could be secret conversations but they are never private in the sense there is always somebody in the government involved. I did research on the Herbert Hoover administration when I was in college, and I was struck by the fact that even then, that the president, all the secretary of state had a conversation, it was always -- there was somebody recording it. [20:20:03] Now, let's be clear. Let's be honest. Donald Trump may have business interests in Taiwan. We know he spoke to the president of the Philippines and he does have business interest there. In fact, his business partner has been named the special envoy from the Philippines to the United States. COOPER: We haven't been able to confirm business interest in Taiwan, although local media in Taiwan was reporting that. ZAKARIA: I said "may". Right. COOPER: Somebody from the Trump organization was there in September, looking at application for a luxury hotel. But again, we haven't confirmed -- ZAKARIA: And precisely to be clear and sure about all this, you want to be sure that there was somebody taking down what happened in the conversation. So, what's worrying about this is, you know, is this -- is he winging it? Is it part of a strategic plan? If it's part of a strategic plan to put pressure on China, I think it's perfectly plausible. Let's understand about it. Let's hear about it. But as I say, the president of the United States, the president-elect, don't get to do this without anybody in the United States government knowing about it. COOPER: Something like this, Ivan, for Taiwan, would be an enormous deal. I mean, obviously, they want international recognition. They want full diplomatic relations restored with the United States. IVAN WATSON, CNN SENIOR INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: That's right. They are relatively isolated. They -- the Taiwanese crave official recognition. And the Chinese state news agency has already interpreted this phone call, declaring an historical dialogue, that the first time in nearly 40 years. So, there is a lot of symbolism here. The important thing now is how will the Chinese react to this? Will they perhaps see this as a gaffe? Or will they see this as a deliberate provocation a step on Chinese sovereignty, since they see Taiwan very much as part of their state, even though the Taiwanese view themselves as a separate country. COOPER: You know, Fareed, CNN reporting that a Trump transition advisor who supports the independence who's involved or at least in the past helped facilitate it. Which is -- it is not a impartial State Department employee. What do you make of that potential involvement? ZAKARIA: Again, I think -- Ivan is exactly right. This is very thorny territory. I mean, China believes Taiwan is a province. If we are changing policy, this would be one of the largest shifts in American foreign policy in decades. And you'd hope that it would have been thought through. We would have gotten everybody in the United States government on board, we understand what it is. Ronald Reagan did make a few overtures to Taiwan when he was president, but they were considered. They were very thought through. They were calculated. And, by the way, China at that point was 2 percent of global GDP. China today is 16 percent of global GDP. It is second largest economy in the world, one of the largest holders in American debt. So, again, it's not that you shouldn't do it. But let's just hope there is actually some thought about this. COOPER: Well, I mean, that was I was trying to ask Kellyanne Conway, about what is the process by which this is decided. She obviously -- you know, she says he has access to information but didn't really go into any level of detail. And obviously, Ivan, this comes at relations with China are always fraught. But there is a lot of flash points right now in South China Sea and elsewhere that are, you know, very much in the balance. WATSON: Absolutely. South China Sea. Disagreement between Washington and Beijing over what China claims a huge body of water to be its own pretty much sovereign territory. North Korea, which is really considered a threat to the region, a threat to the U.S. U.S. needs China's help to deal with North Korea. And as some people have pointed, this kind of could potentially raise tensions at a time when you don't really need them with some of these very serious challenges already existing on the table. People were not terribly worried that Taiwan was going to explode, even though you had the recent election of a pretty anti-China, pro- independence Taiwanese president in recent history. ZAKARIA: I mean, you have to remember, we need China for Iran sanctions. You can't do Iran sanctions without the U.N. Security Council. China has been very helpful to the United States. You need China any time you do sanctions against anyone. Any time you want to intervene with the U.N. involvement. Any time you want to put sanctions on. Any time you need funding for some international project. The China now, as I said, the second largest economy in the world. We want to be clear what exactly our strategy is if the point is to piss them off. COOPER: Although, I mean, throughout the campaign, Donald Trump did -- I mean, you could argue he provoked them in ways. I mean, that he was pointing out, you know, currency manipulation. A whole host of issues. ZAKARIA: So, candidates have often done that. People sometimes forget when Bill Clinton campaigned, he talked about the butchers of Beijing referring to Tiananmen Square. But then you come into office, and that sobers you and you recognize the realities and you understand you are speaking for the whole country and the whole country's interest. And I just hope that that is what Donald Trump is thinking about, that we have the entire country to worry about. [20:25:03] Not, you know, one particular rhetorical shot that you can take, because were China to react badly and it is difficult to imagine that they will simply take this quietly. They've asked to see -- Henry Kissinger is in China right now because they are trying to make sense of what is happening in the United States. But they have historically reacted very strongly and almost neurologically to any type of pro-Taiwanese sentiment. COOPER: Fareed Zakaria, thank you. Ivan Watson, great to see you. Just ahead, our political panel weighs on the President-elect Trump's call with Taiwan and its possible consequences. Plus, high drama in a South Carolina courtroom, where the jury in the Walter Scott shooting trial has told the judge repeatedly it cannot reach a verdict. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: Breaking news tonight: President-elect Donald Trump breaking with nearly four decades of U.S. foreign policy, speaking in the phone today with the president of Taiwan, a phone call that perhaps threatens to trigger a diplomatic showdown with China. Joining -- or at least concern from China. Joining me now is CNN political commentator and Trump supporter, Jeffrey Lord. CNN political analyst and "USA Today" columnist Kirsten Powers, and Democratic strategist John Tasini. [20:30:01] Kirsten, what do you make of this phone call? KIRSTEN POWERS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, I think the biggest question is whether it was an accident or whether it was something that he did intentionally. Now he has tweeted out that he received a phone call and it was a phone call to congratulate him and he took the phone call. But, you know, it was on his schedule the day he was going to meet with John Bolten, he's the former ambassador to the UN under George Bush who wrote in the "Wall Street Journal" this year basically talk about the ladders of escalation -- diplomatic ladders of escalation with Taiwan. And a ways that you could do with China through to the ways, through basically antagonizing them through inviting for example people from Taiwan to come to this the State Department, that starting to sort of escalate in this way. So it's kind of interesting that he may have met with today and that -- and there are people that he is looking at from positions in the administration who advocate this kind of behavior. So, it's possible that it was that, it's also possible that he just received the phone call and he didn't know he wasn't suppose to take it, though I find that highly unlikely. COOPER: Jeff, I mean is it -- is it a concern here -- I mean there have been questions that raise about how much Donald Trump is receiving intelligence, briefings and probably more to the point in this issue, communicating with -- communicating with the State Department, actually getting readouts from the State Department or consulting with them before a call like this. JEFFREY LORD, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: No it is not a concern. I'm sure he's consulting with somebody there in his intelligence, you know, group there that cease surrounding him. General Flynn, et cetera. But Anderson, I would point out that four presidents of the United States that I can think of right off the bat, Franklin Roosevelt, Nixon, Reagan and Obama, have taken office and then changed major American foreign policy with different countries. Franklin Roosevelt recognized the Soviet Union the first time in his existence after 16 years of policy by four presidents including one Democrat and three Republicans. Richard Nixon famously opened the door to China, stunned the world ... POWERS: But not a momement. LORD: ... to death (ph), so the worst decade. JONATHAN TASINI, DEMOCRATIC STRATEGIST: But Jeff nobody did it as president-elect. This is ridiculous. Nobody ... LORD: Ronald Reagan did the same in his very first press conference with in terms of the Soviet Union. POWERS: But Jeffrey no, you can't say ... LORD: And of course President Obama has just the first policy ... POWERS: Don't you think he discuss it with somebody first and maybe like met -- you know, we're talking about 40 years of diplomacy. Bipartisan ... LORD: Well how do you know .... POWERS: Hold on. With Republican and Democrats and normally what you would do is maybe have some meetings and talk to people and think this through. Not just do a phone call. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Well Jeff -- our -- the latest reporting, I mean officials from the State Department said that ... POWERS: Yeah. COOPER: ... he -- they have not been in touch with anyone from the transition regarding President elect Trump for any of these phone calls or any of this phone calls. LORD: I understand that. But my point is ... COOPER: But that, you know, why he ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Why doesn't that concern you? LORD: What I'm sorry? COOPER: Why doesn't that concern you? I mean presidents, you know, and there is a State Department for a reason. You can argue whether or not, you know, they have ... (CROSSTALK) LORD: That's a good point. And let me point out to you, that when Richard Nixon did his opening with China, he didn't talk to the State Department. I believe he even kept his own Secretary of State out of it. He dealt with Henry Kissinbger who was his General Flynn in the day, his own private national security advisor. TASINI: Jeff ... COOPER: Jonathan? TASINI: .... but here is the problem. First of all we're normalizing Donald Trump again. And if you look back at the debates and throughout the campaign, it was very clear Donald Trump had no idea about diplomacy, he had no idea how to talk about the world. COOPER: By the there were reportings that Mike Pence has been consulting with the State Department for some of his ... TASINI: Well that's fine. He is the vice president elect, he would think -- this is the problem I think long-term is, Donald Trump doesn't know diplomacy. He doesn't understand the world. And this kind of phone call is sort of mind boggling, because anybody that had a smidgeon -- the two of us. If somebody -- if we were president elect we would know that there is a long-term one China policy. We would not accept this kind of call. LORD: But so what? TASINI: Hold on Jeff. And we would at least call up the State Departments, the experts and say how to do we handle this? And number two, in case you didn't know, Donald Trump is the president-elect currently. He does not have the authority to be talking to and essentially making these kind of steps that put the United States and the current president in the kind of danger that ... COOPER: All right Jonathan, I want to ... TASINI: The other guy. COOPER: Jeff, I want you to be able to respond to that. TASINI: It's ridiculous. My friend. LORD: Look. When Barack Obama was just the presidential nominee of the Democratic Party he went over to Berlin and gave a major foreign policy speech. I mean something no other presidential nominee had ever done ... TASINI: Well. LORD: ... and he wasn't even president elect. I mean come on, John. John, John. TASINI: But wait a minute Jeff. He didn't meet with the head of state. LORD: John ... TASINI: He didn't meet with the head of state that he went and gave a speech and by the way ... LORD: John. TASINI: ... in case he didn't. LORD: It is the problem. POWERS: No, but just ... (CROSSTALK) LORD: You're advocating the status quo. And Donald Trump has been elected to do things differently. [20:35:03] Now, I don't know and you don't know -- none of us know what's really going on behind the scenes with this phone call. But whether it was, you know, however you want to describe it, this is something that we're going to see a lot of in the future, where the current ways of doing thing which the American is doing things in Washington which the American people have said does not work are being changed. Radically so. COOPER: So Kirsten what about that point? POWERS: Yeah. COOPER: Because I'm sure there's many people who agree with that saying, you know, what this is why he is elected to do. POWERS: I think that's a great point, yeah. COOPER: He's winging it and well maybe that's ... POWERS: Well, I don't think he should be winging it. I think it is right that people want to do things differently. And I don't think people are necessarily opposed to a different attack with China perhaps. What -- the issue here like I said what we really need is more information. We need to know what went into the thinking behind this. And it does seem that he just responded to an incoming phone call which doesn't seem like a strategy. And there's a reason, you know, Jeffrey you were saying so what. I mean so what well there's a reason United States sided with China. Right. I mean we -- it's one of the biggest markets in the entire world. (CROSSTALK) POWERS: And with China -- no but listen, with China and Taiwan it is an either/or. You either are doing business with China or your doing business with Taiwan. China is not going to say you just go do things with Taiwan and continue to have a relationship with us. That's just not the way it's going to work and they will -- they'll realize they will retaliate. TASINI: Diplomacy does have some our key (ph) rules, I agree in, some of those are uncomfortable Jeff, but any normal diplomat, any person running for elective office in the United States Senate understands these rules and you can't just come in like a bull in a China shop and upset these things it. It does take time, it does take some thought and process and talking to people. And this is the problem, last point I make is, this is the problem we have to face with Donald Trump. He's unprepared. He does not understand the world and we have a man walking to the Oval Office that will tweet, will pick up phone calls and not go through those kind of processes that can result in a shift but should do so |in a very thoughtful way. POWERS: Yes. COOPER: Jeffrey I want you to respond. LORD: John, we've done it your way and the government is in a mess. That's all I can say. The very first thing that Ronald Reagan did and actually there was some accident to it. For decades the Soviet ambassador had been he only one of 150 ambassadors to get a private entrance into the State Department to go directly in an elevator -- private elevator to the Secretary of State's office. When Ronald Reagan became president he drove into that private garage and was turned away. And maybe go through the public entrance. The message sent things are changing. Whether this is intended or not. Things are changing. Message delivered. POWERS: I -- you know, I can still. I think it's his -- is right as a president to set the policy for the United States. Is just that that the United States isn't his toy. You know, this is bipartisan policy through to, you know, to Republican and Democrats and I think that he needs to maybe spend some time and understand that. COOPER: All right, just leave the conversation there. Jonathan, thanks so much, Kirsten as well. Jeffrey Lord have a great weekend. This week the Ohio State campus was shaken by violence. The FBI said the 18-year-old would be terrorist or terrorists may have been radicalized by either Al-Qaeda or ISIS. Up next, another story from American college, this is incredible young and in love and radicalized. How university in Mississippi cheerleader and her boyfriend committed themselves to ISIS and ended up in U.S. federal prison. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:42:16] COOPER: The FBI says the attacker this week in Ohio State University may have been inspired by ISIS or Al-Qaeda. The Somali immigrant and OSU student was shot to death by police after he injure 11 people with his car and a butcher knife. Terrorism is confirm, they won't be first case leading to a college campus. Senior investigative correspondent Drew Griffin has this exclusive report, and a couple from Mississippi state now separated by prison. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) DREW GRIFFIN, CNN SENIOR INVESTIGATIVE CORRESPONDENT: Muhammad Dakhlalla just 24-years-old, is at the very start of an eight year federal prison sentence for trying to join and help ISIS, a radical Muslim extremist? Hardly. He's as American as you and me and he got into this mess because he fell in love. How did this happen? MUHAMMAD DAKHLALLA, FEDERAL PRISON INMATE: Where do you want me start exactly? GRIFFIN: His friends know him as Mo, born and raised in Mississippi. Muslim and non-Muslim friends. Hit and miss with the ladies. Until at Mississippi State University in his senior year he met and fell head over heels for a Mississippi state cheerleader named Jaelyn Young. DAKHLALLA: Yes. She was beautiful and things like that. GRIFFIN: She's American too. And Mississippi all the way. But within months Mo says Jaelyn was changing. Converting to Islam. Changing her dress. Then began introducing Mo to the online brand of Islam she had been learning about. This happened so fast. DAKHLALLA: It did. Maybe we were going a little too fast. You know. GRIFFIN: But you were in love. DAKHLALLA: Yes. Yeah. GRIFFIN: And she was coming to you, right? DAKHLALLA: Yeah. And, you know, that love can ultimately, you know, blind out your intelligence. GRIFFIN: The Federal Bureau of Prisons rarely grants access to convicted felons like Mo. This is an exception. An agreement between the Department of Justice, CNN and Muhammad Dakhlalla himself. Perhaps for all to understand just how powerful ISIS online propaganda can be. His girlfriend Jaelyn Young merely showed Mo the videos. The videos did the rest. DAKHLALLA: And so when she showed me that video, I think it just kind of brought a tenseness in her. You know, I felt those same things, I guess, just because she was feeling it. GRIFFIN: And that progressed. DAKHLALLA: Yeah. Progressive to the point that I -- my mind wasn't thinking straight. GRIFFIN: Mo, what were you going to do? Drop your entire life and run over to a war zone? [20:45:01] DAKHLALLA: Yeah. I mean when she first looked at these videos, she had, you know, a strong belief that OK this is the group to really help out, you know, the Muslims. Rebuild towns, people were helping to feed -- feed the needy. GRIFFIN: According to the FBI Jaelyn Young reached out to a contact she thought would help her and Mo travel to Turkey. Across the board into Syria and join ISIS. The two secretly married. Begaan intensive preparation period. Bought one way plane tickets to Istanbul. On August 2015, Mo and Jaelyn packed their bags he wrote this goodbye letter to his parents. The first lines, I'm sorry, I love you, I've decided to leave and won't I be coming back. They got as far as the boarding gate. The moment they arrested you? DAKHLALLA: Oh my heart sank. I felt like my whole body shut down. GRIFFIN: It turns out the online ISIS recruiter who had been helping make arrangements for the couple was in fact an FBI employee. This past summer they both pleaded guilty. Mo given an eight year sentence citing his cooperation with authorities. Jaelyn Young the mastermind was sentenced to 12 years. She's refused to speak to CNN. You haven't said her name once. DAKHLALLA: Oh yeah. GRIFFIN: You haven't. DAKHLALLA: No I have not. GRIFFIN: He also finds it difficult to speak about the other woman in his life, the woman he wrote this final goodbye to. Mo Dakhlalla's mother was suffering from cancer at his arrest. She died earlier this year. DAKHLALLA: And that's probably -- or is one of the biggest regrets that I have in my life. Still haunts me to this day. That I would prefer this woman that I've been together with for under a year and lie to my mother about where I was going. GRIFFIN: His other regret, that in time of confusion, especially about his religion, he failed to reach out to his dad, an imam himself, who would have never taught his son to kill or hurt anyone. DAKHLALLA: I wish I just reached out to my dad. You know, if I just asked him, he would just illuminate me on what was happening, what's really happening with this group. I feel like that I should owe people back to say, hey, don't do what I did. It's -- there is no -- that's not what they are doing over there. What ISIS is doing over there, that's not Islam. (END VIDEO CLIP) GRIFFIN: Anderson, Mo Dakhlalla is not bitter. In fact he tells me he is glad he was caught. He knows know had he made to Syria there is a good chance he will be dead. 8 years from now when he leaves prison he'll be 32 years old. Anderson? COOPER: Unbelievable story. Drew, thanks very much to the reporting. More breaking news, ahead a dead locked jury in the murder trial of a former South Carolina police officer charged in the killing of Walter Scott. A single juror holding out. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:52:08] COOPER: There's breaking news tonight. Jurors in the Walter Scott shooting trial said they are deadlocked with a single male juror holding out. Former South Carolina Police Officer Michael Slager faces 30 years to life in prison. He's charged with murder in the death of Scott, an unarmed African-American man after a traffic stop in April of 2015. The killing captured on video. Hard to forget that video. Boris Sanchez joins me now with the latest. What are we hearing? There's been a lot of back and forth between the jury and the judge today. BORIS SANCHEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yeah, Anderson, it was a roller coaster day in this trial, the judge and jury going back and forth, seemingly every few hours. The jury telling the judge that they were having a hard time coming to a consensus. And then the judge essentially telling to go back and work harder and deliberate until they came to a decision. It all started around 1:00 p.m. when they asked for testimony from a specific witness. And then minutes later, they gave a note to the judge saying that they were having a very difficult time coming to a consensus. The judge issuing an Allen charge, telling them it was their duty to come to a verdict. The jury deliberating for a lot longer. They came back with three separate notes for the judge, indicating that, again, they were having some trouble. The judge then asked them if they were hopelessly deadlocked. They said, that if perhaps they had some clarification on certain laws, they could potentially come to a decision. Unclear what the clarification they needed. They ultimately asked the judge for the trial to be postponed until 9:00 a.m. Monday and the judge conceded, Anderson. COOPER: And is it the holdout juror who's communicated with the judge? SANCHEZ: Yeah, that was really one of the most fascinating parts of today. One of those three letters to the judge that I mentioned was actually an emotional note from the one holdout juror who told the judge he could not, in clear conscience, convict Michael Slager. Interestingly enough, a separate part of that note said that he could not look in Walter Scott's family's eyes and tell them that Michael Slager was innocent. So clearly, some indecision there. The other two notes are fascinating as well, one of them coming from the jury foreman who said that it was just that one juror, that the 11 others were already decided. And then the third note saying that the juror was having "issues". Apparently, that juror at some point became very emotional and could not come to a decision along with the rest of the jurors. COOPER: Walter family's -- Walter Scott's family just spoke. What did they say? SANCHEZ: A very emotional response from them. One of their attorneys saying that this isn't a story about one black family against Michael Slager, that this was the world against Michael Slager, in the pursuit of justice. They say they pray that that one undecided juror reflects over the weekend and comes to a conclusion on Monday so they can put this behind them and begin to heal, Anderson. COOPER: All right, Boris Sanchez, thanks. Joining me now is Criminal Defense Attorney and CNN Legal Analyst Danny Cevallos. [20:55:00] How common is it that there's a one holdout juror? And we'll see the movies and things like that. DANNY CEVALLOS, CRIMINAL DEFENSE ATTORNEY: It's uncommon. Typically, all you really need is more than one to have some kind of an alliance. One juror is usually going to be overcome by the will of the other jurors. But in a case like this, defense attorneys like me admittedly aren't big fans of Allen charges because we view them as sort of putting undue pressure on that one juror who may be holding out. Usually holding out for an acquittal. COOPER: The judge has told the jury, I mean, to continue. Is it rare that the judge actually knows who the holdout juror is? CEVALLOS: You know, in South Carolina, the general rule is that the judge can't ask the jurors specifically about the division, who's voting what way and where. But, if the jurors tell him without him asking, then there's no constitutional violation. But as a general rule, the judge isn't supposed to know the breakdown among the jurors. Practically speaking, he or she is usually going to find out. COOPER: If there is a -- if the juror -- if the holdout continues to hold out, there would be a mistrial, I suppose, I assume a retrial. There's also a federal case, though, against Slager. How would a mistrial affect that? CEVALLOS: Well, generally in the federal context, the federal government has a policy, it's not a constitutional rule, but it's called the Petite Policy. And it means that if there is a state prosecution that ends in either an acquittal or a conviction, then the federal government has to look at whether or not substantial federal interests are vindicated. It may not feel that that's the case. First of all, this is not an acquittal. This would be a none -- this would be a hung jury. COOPER: Right. CEVALLOS: But, additionally, the federal government probably views this case as vindicating civil rights law as opposed to simply state murder laws. COOPER: Right. And we should remember, this is a case where this -- the killing was caught on video for all to see. Imagine if there was no video, what might have happened. Danny Cevallos will continue to follow. Thanks very much. Much more ahead on tonight's other big breaking news. President-elect Trump's phone call with Taiwan's President, a possible fallout. I'll talk to Former Ambassador Christopher Hill who served as assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, and top (inaudible) of the "New York Times". (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: Thanks for joining us for the second hour of "360". The breaking news, a break in nearly 40 years of U.S. diplomatic practice, today, President-elect Donald Trump spoke on the phone with the President of Taiwan. [21:00:00] This happened without any contact with either the State Department or the White House according to administration official. Trump tweeted twice about this tonight. First, there was, "The President of Taiwan called me today to wish me congratulations on winning the presidency. Thank you." And then, "Interesting how the U.S. sells Taiwan billions of dollars of military equipment but I should not ... THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [20:00:01] DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENT-ELECT: You will see changes; very quick you will see it. A shrinking work force -- you will say it. A shrinking work force and flat wages are not the new normal. And when' not even talking about flat. We're talking about wages where some of you in this audience, hardworking incredible Americans, were making more money 20 years ago than you're making today. And today, you're older and you're working harder and in many cases you have two jobs. Some of that's because of Obamacare and, by the way, we are repealing and replacing Obamacare. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We can reverse the stagnation and usher in a period of true opportunity and growth, endless gridlock is not a way of life any longer. We don't have to accept that. Government can be responsive and we can be proud again of how Washington works. And I've spoken to Democrats and I said to them, look, we can't go on with this gridlock, it's gone on if so many years, that I can't get together. We'll get together and I believe they want to get together, you know why? Because it's time and people are angry, they're angry and they're going to get together. We're going to make joint decisions. We are -- and the nice part, our victory was so great we have the House, we have the Senate and we have the presidency. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) But we want to get them on board also. People are constantly telling me and telling you to reduce our expectations. Those people are fools. They're fools. But this campaign proved the old rules no longer apply. That anything we want for our country is now possible. Anything we want, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Now is not the time to downsize our dreams, but to set our sights higher than ever before for our country. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Now is the time to push for real profound change that restores the full promise of America for all of its people and those people are great people, I got to know them, believe me, over the last 18 months. And what we've created is a movement and it's a beautiful thing. You take a look here, the roads are all gridlocked, all gridlocked, all locked down, all secured up and people pour in. It's an amazing thing. Now is the time to unlock the potential of millions of Americans left on the sidelines, their talents unused, their dreams unrealized and their aspirations totally forgotten, and these are people of great talent. This is the moment. This is our chance. This is our window for action. This is the hour when the great deeds can be done and our highest hopes can come true. We're going to do it, folks. We're going to do it. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We're going to do it. (CROWD CHANTING "USA, USA, USA") Thank you. I love you, too. Some guy, look at this guy. And I do love him. He's a rough looking cookie, though, I'll tell you. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We love -- we have a lot of love, believe me. Going to be a lot of love in our country. Driven by these goals, I'm working to assemble a detailed action plan for America. My plan begins with a bold structural reform to create millions of new jobs and rapidly expand our economic growth. And you see what's happening with taxes. You see what's happening with regulations which are totally out of control. Right now, we punish companies for doing business in America. They're actually punished. That's why they're leaving. And, by the way, I have to say this -- we are going to reduce taxes to a point that our incredible. For the middle-class in particular, but for our companies, and we're going to reduce the regulations. But if a company wants to still leave the state of Ohio or Pennsylvania or how about North Carolina? [20:05:10] How well did we do in North Carolina, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Remember when they said, "He can not win North Carolina." So we just won Ohio, Iowa and we had just won Florida. Breaking news, Donald Trump has won Florida. They say whoa. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) And we won it big. But then the people back there, the extremely dishonest press said -- (BOOS) Right? (BOOS) Very dishonest people. (BOOS) How about -- how about -- I mean, how dishonest. How about when a major anchor who hosted a debate started crying when she realized that we won? How about that? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Tears. Tell me this isn't true. And you know what she doesn't understand? Things are going to be much better now. She doesn't understand. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) I mean think of it. We won in a landslide. That was a landslide. And -- we didn't have the press, the press was brutal. You know what? (BOOS) Hey, in the great state of Ohio we didn't have the upper echelon of politician, either, did we? (BOOS) But I will say this. I will say this and it was very nice, your Governor John Kasich called me after the election. (BOOS) And was very nice. He said, congratulations, that was amazing. He couldn't believe how much we won Ohio by or the election by. Remember, you cannot get to 270, the dishonest press. There is no road. Folks, how many times did we hear this? "There is no path to 270." (LAUGHTER) There is no path. There is no path. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) There is no path for Donald Trump. Texas is in play. Do you remember that one? Now, as a Republican I'm supposed to win Texas. As a Republican, I'm supposed to win Georgia. As a Republican, I'm supposed to win the great state of Utah. I love Utah. Love those states. Remember when they said, Donald Trump is going to lose to some guy I never even heard of. Who is that guy? He is going to lose to this guy. But the people of Utah were amazing and we trounced them. We trounced them. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) And, by the way, Hillary came in second and that guy came in third, I was still trying to figure out -- I'm still trying to figure out what was he going to prove. I wanted to find out what the hell was he trying to prove? I guess he wanted us to lose the Supreme Court. That's about the only thing he was going to get. But think of it, they said, "I'll tell you what --" two or three weeks before the election. My friends were telling me just the opposite that live in Texas and Georgia. They said Georgia is in play. Texas is in play. That means like we're even. And then we won in a landslide both states. I said, what happened, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) They go for weeks Texas is in play, then you turn on the television like two minutes later, Donald Trump has won Texas. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) These are very, very dishonest people. OK. (BOOS) [20:10:05] I love this stuff. Should I go on with this just a little bit longer? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) I love it. How about it's like 12:00 in the evening and Pennsylvania -- I'm leading by a lot and we couldn't get off 98 percent. They didn't want to call it, we're leading by so much that it's impossible, if I lost every other vote and they refused to call. Then at 3:00, I'll never forget I watched a particular person and we won Wisconsin. And we won Michigan, and we won Pennsylvania, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) And that person is doing the map and that person was saying for months that there's no way that Donald Trump can break the blue wall, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We didn't break it, we shattered that sucker. We shattered it. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We shattered it. Man, that poor wall is busted up. So, I'll never forget it, though because it felt so good. You know, more so because they kept saying there's no path and all this nonsense. So -- and I go out and see the people like this and I'd say, how are we going to lose? I mean, how are we going to lose? But what happened, so they'd say we win Wisconsin, Donald Trump 38 years or so. Donald Trump has won Michigan. And then they're looking at the map, they're saying oh, wow. There's no way for Hillary Clinton to become president. Donald Trump is president of the United States. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Amazing. It was amazing. Really amazing. And one of the announcers, one of the announcers, I have to tell you, from ESPN, now they cover football and boxing and everything, right? And he went out and he said, "I've got to tell you, that event last night -- meaning the election results -- was better than any fight, any baseball game, any football game. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) He said that was the most exciting event I've ever seen and it was politics. And then you look at the NFL. Well, now, they should start recovering. But their ratings were so far down and you know what the reason was? This -- because this business is tougher than the NFL. It's crazy. The people liked it. Their ratings were down 20 percent or 21 percent and it was because of us. So, we had a lot of fun. The bottom line is we won. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We won. We won big. Whether it's producing steel, building cars or curing disease, we want the next generation of innovation and production to happen right here in America and right here in Ohio, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) First on taxes. We're going to massively lower taxes and make America the best place in the world to hire, to invest, to grow, to create and to expand. We'll do that. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) On regulation, we're going to eliminate every single wasteful regulation that undermines the ability of our workers and our companies to compete with companies from foreign lands. We're going to do it. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We have the greatest competitors on earth. And by the way, I've put on some of the greatest business people in the world. One of the networks said, "Why he put on a billionaire at Commerce." Well, that's because this guy knows how to make money, folks. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) He knows how to make money. I'd like to put on a guy that failed all his life, but we don't want that, do we? No, I mean, I put on a killer. I've been honest, I said I am going to be putting on the greatest killers you've ever seen. We need that, it's time. It's time. It's time. [20:15:02] We have a great, great cabinet I'll tell you. It's coming and wait until you see what we have next week. Are we doing a good job with our cabinet and our people? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) And I don't want to tell you, I don't want to tell you this because I want to save the suspense for next week. So I will not tell you, I refuse to tell you -- and don't let it outside of this room, do you promise? Raise your hand? Promise. So, I will not tell you that one of our great, great generals -- (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Don't let it outside, right? And, of course, the press is very honest, they'll never let this go. Even though it's all live, they've got about seven stations live. We are going to appoint Mad Dog Mattis as our secretary of defense. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) But we're not announcing it until Monday, so don't tell anybody. Mad Dog, he's great. He is great. I asked one of the generals, I love the generals and I won't use his name but he probably would come forward. But I said to him, "You're a good general, aren't you? "Yes, sir, I am." I said, "So, how do you compare to General Mattis? How do you compare to Mad Dog?" "Sir, he's better than I am." I loved it, I said, "I love you to say that." they love him. So, we're going to be announcing him on Monday of next week. Keep it inside the room. But that's what we have and he's our best. They say he's the closest thing to General George Patton that we have and it's about time. It's about time. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) OK. I gave up a little secret. My people over there are probably saying, "You weren't supposed to do that, Mr. Trump." On energy, we will pursue energy independence and cancel the job- killing restrictions on the production of shale energy, oil, natural gas and clean coal, and we're going put the miners of Ohio back to work. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) On infrastructure, we will build new roads, tunnels, bridges, railways, airports, schools and hospitals, including major projects in the inner cities. It's such potential in the inner city. We're not using our potential. Remember when I would make the speeches, I'd say what the hell do you have to lose. The African-American community was so great to me in this election. They were so great to me. Amazing. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) I couldn't believe it. I started off at a low number and every week, boom, boom, boom, and I got it up to a number that's higher than all of the Republican candidates for years and it was great. The Hispanic community, I did great with the Hispanic community. Great, higher than people that were supposed to have done well. I felt it. And is this really a big surprise? We did great with women. Can you believe it? Great with women. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) A couple of polls came in -- (BOOS) A couple of polls came in in the early states and they said, "We don't believe it. He's doing well with women." But every time I went out, I saw those beautiful pink signs, right, "Women for Trump", and I knew we were going to do well so we did great with women. We did great with everybody. We will deepen our harbors and new lanes of commerce across the nation. We have harbors that ships can't even go into. [20:20:02] We will have two simple rules when it comes -- (INAUDIBLE) They don't know that Hillary lost a couple of weeks ago. They forgot. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) I don't know. Where do these people come from? Oh, well. They're taking her back home to mom. No, it's true. It's true. They don't realize. They don't know. You know, a lot of the people that protested, we said did you vote? No, I didn't vote. They don't vote. They never vote. And do you agree with my stance that if people burn the American flag there should be consequence, right? (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) I think so. I think so. (CROWD CHANTING "USA, USA, USA") We will have two simple rules when it comes to this massive rebuilding effort -- buy America and hire American. We're going to do it ourselves. We're going to do it ourselves. And that will be our new mantra. On trade, the history of nations teaches us that this strength of a country and its trade and manufacturing sector is vital to both its economic prosperity and national security because we don't do that. Our borders are weak, our trade is terrible, you are going to see a turn that is so big and is going to happen so fast. And we started today in Indiana, believe me, that's just the beginning. That's just the beginning. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Our trade deficit now is nearly $800 billion a year, it's a chronic drag on growth and a destroyer, it destroys the wealth of our country and jobs, and jobs. Ohio has lost one-third of its manufacturing jobs since NAFTA. And you know the nice part? Now I don't have to say "signed by Bill Clinton and approved by Hillary." Who cares? All I can tell you is that NAFTA is a disaster. What difference does it make? We will fix NAFTA or we'll terminate it and start all over again. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) America has lost 70,000 factories, hard to believe. I always say that's a typo -- 70,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization. Think of it. In the year 2000, America had nearly 20 million manufacturing jobs in the Rust Belt, OK? Today, we have only 12.3 million manufacturing jobs left in the Rust Belt. We're going to bring them back. We're going to bring them back. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We're going to bring them back. The Rust Belt has been hammered and one of the reasons I won, it's one of the reasons I won. Ohio, as an example, is down from 1.2 million manufacturing jobs in the year 2000 to only 690,000 jobs today. Not going to happen anymore, folks. Or take Michigan, they're down from 900,000 manufacturing jobs in the year 2000 to only 600,000 manufacturing jobs today. I see these numbers and it's sad. But what isn't sad, because this is all about hope, but it's real hope because we'll turn that around so fast. And we don't want Ford leaving and going to Mexico to build its small cars. We don't want it. We're going to turn it all around. We're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world. I've been saying it for months. [20:25:00] It used to be the cars were made in Flint, right? And you couldn't drink the water in Mexico. Today, the cars are made in Mexico and you can't drink the water in Flint, Michigan. You know that, right? What a difference. But we're turning that around. What a terrible thing that was, too. Gross incompetence on so many levels. The era of economic surrender is over. We're going to fight for every last American job. It's time to remove the rust from the Rust Belt and usher in a new industrial revolution. We're going to do it. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) On health care reform, we will repeal and replace Obamacare. We have no choice. We have no choice. And we will finally fix health care for America's incredible veterans. Veterans. We love our veterans. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Where are the veterans? Raise your hand. Who's a veteran? We have a lot of veterans. Our veterans have not been treated properly. And I want to thank our veterans and I want to thank our military. And I want to thank our police force forces because the number of votes I got was staggering, staggering. For whatever reason, people in uniforms like Trump. I don't know, tough to figure that out. These are great people. We're going to take care of our veterans and we're working right now on somebody to run the Veterans Administration who will be terrific. Believe me, terrific and I'll be watching, too. I'll be watching. On child care, I'm asking Congress to pass legislation to support the American family and make safe and affordable child care accessible to all. It's so important. Our agenda will fight to increase pay and opportunities for women in the workforce. Support women entrepreneur. Who's a woman entrepreneur here? Who are the women? A lot of them. I hate to tell you, men. Generally speaking, they're better than you are. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) Now, if I said it the other way around, I'd be in big trouble, don't you agree? We're going to make sure that no one is penalized for the decision to have a family. Right now, they're penalized. On crime, the murder rate has experienced its largest increase in 45 years in our country. Think of that. We're going to support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. They are incredible people. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) My administration will marshal federal resources to bring this crime wave to an end, most in 45 years. We believe all Americans have the right to live in safety and peace, and we will never back down in fighting to deliver that security to every community in our land and to our inner cities that have been forsaken. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We're going to take care of our inner cities and the people in our inner cities. On defense, we will begin a major national effort to rebuild our badly depleted military. We have no choice. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) We have no choice. You look at this world, it's a tinderbox, we have no choice. And we want a strong military and we don't want to have to use it. Ideally, we don't to use it. Although we will destroy ISIS. (CHEERS AND APPLAUSE) At the same time, we will pursue a new foreign policy that finally learns from the mistakes of the past. We will stop looking to topple regimes and overthrow governments, folks. Remember, $6 trillion, $6 trillion in the Middle East, $6 trillion. Our goal is stability not chaos, because we want to rebuild our country. It's time. It's time. We will partner with any nation that is willing to join us in the effort to defeat ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism. OK? We have to say the term. Have to say the term. [20:30:02] DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT-ELECT OF UNITED STATES: ... Islamic terrorism. OK, we have to say the term. Have to say the term. In our dealings with other countries, we will seek shared interests wherever possible and pursue a new era of peace, understanding and goodwill. On immigration we will restore the sovereignty of the United States. We will restore the sovereignty. We will finally end illegal immigration, have to. We will construct a great wall at the border. Dismantle the criminal cartels and liberate our communities from the epidemic of gang violence and drugs pouring into our nation. We will ask Congress to reform our visa and immigration programs to protect jobs and wages for American workers. I love American workers. I love these people. You know what I call the American workers? The forgotten men and women of our nation. And those men and women came out to vote, nobody ever thought that was going to happen. They came out by the millions. These are great, great people. To keep our nation secure from terrorism and extremism, we will suspend immigration from regions where it cannot be safely processed. We have regions of the world, people are pouring in. I don't have to say who's letting them in anymore. I just have to say they are pouring into our country. We don't need San Bernardino. We don't need another Orlando. We don't need another World Trade Center. We don't need Paris. You look at Paris. You look at Nice. You look all over the world, look what's happening to Germany. We don't need that folks. We have enough problems, believe me. Your state has just experienced a violent atrocity at the great Ohio State University and that is a great place. That further demonstrates the security threats are created and these are just threats that are stupidly created by our very, very stupid politicians, refugee programs. We offer our thoughts, prayers and deepest sympathies to the victims, and our hearts go out to the entire community of Ohio State. What a great place. Great place. We're with you and we will stand with you every single step of the way. The job of the president is to keep America safe. And that will always be my highest priority. We will do everything in our power to keep this scourge of terrorism out of our country. We're going to keep it out of our country. Just so you understand, people are pouring in from regions of the Middle East. We have no idea who they are, where they come from, what they are thinking, and we're going stop that dead, cold, flat. And you just take a look at what just happened in your state. Just take a good look and really think about it. Ethics reform will be a crucial part of our 100 day plan as well. We're going to drain the swamp of corruption in Washington D.C. Drain the swamp. Thank you. I will impose a five year ban on executive branch officials becoming lobbyists and a lifetime ban on officials becoming lobbyist for foreign government. Change is not going to be easy. I am going to need you to fight as hard for these proposals as you fought for this great campaign of ours. [20:35:03] We are going to need our government and this movement to be more engaged and more vigilant than ever before to help us accomplish the reforms and overcome decades of stalemate and gridlock. We're going to get it done, folks. Now that you put m, in this position, even if you don't help me one bit I'm going to get it done, believe me, don't worry about it. It would be easier if you helped but that's all right. Don't worry I'll get it done. Importantly, we are all going to have open arms and we're going to invite everyone from all political persuasions to join our movement to help us achieve our goals for this country. Great schools, safe neighborhoods, a thriving economy and a government that answers only to the people, our people. We are going to have to a dig deep and I know you and I and all of the people working with us are up to the task. There are a lot of people working with us. Every single day you will be the agents of change. Change for our country, but good change. Great change. Americans must ignore the pessimists and embrace the optimism that has always been the central ingredient of the American character. We are the nation that won two world wars that dug out the Panama Canal. That put a man on the moon, and satellites all over space. But somewhere along the way we started thinking small. I'm asking you do dream big again, and bold and daring things for your country will happen once again. I'm asking you to join me in this next chapter of this unbelievable and unprecedented movement as we work towards prosperity at home, peace a broad, a new frontiers in science, technology and space. I am asking you to -- is that right? Yeah. I am asking -- I am -- I love this stuff. He's a believer. You are a believer, right? He's a believer. I'm asking you to believe in America once again. We have many challenges but this is truly an exciting time to be alive. There's been no time like it. The script is not yet written. We do not know what the next page will read. But I'll tell you, it's going to be a great page. But for the first time in a long time what we do know is that the pages will be authored by each one of you. Each one of you. Americans will be the captains of their own destiny once again. You know I talk about our great movement and you are the movement. I'm the messenger. I'm just really the messenger. Although I've been a very good messenger, let's face it, right? I've been a pretty good messenger. So once again I want to thank Ohio. I want to thank the great people of Ohio. It's an incredible place, and incredible state. There's been nothing like it. And remember this, it was when they called the landslide that we had in Ohio that these extremely dishonest people started saying something's happening very big tonight. Something's happening very big. And I've been saying it to you for many months. But I'll say it one last time tonight. We are going to come together and make America great again. Thank you very much. Thank you, Ohio. Thank you. [20:40:04] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: And there you have it. President-elect Donald Trump just wrapping up a speech in Cincinnati, the first stop in what's being called the "Thank You Tour". Let's get right to our panel with their first impressions with me tonight. CNN political commentator, former Obama administration official, Van Jones, co-founder and president of Rebuild the Dream. CNN political commentator and Democratic strategist, Paul Begala. Former Georgia Congressman Jack Kingston. Republican, CNN political commentator and former Reagan White House political director Jeffrey Lord. CNN chief political correspondent Dana Bash. CNN senior political analyst, David Gergen, former adviser to the four presidents, and CNN political analyst and "USA Today" columnist, Kirsten Powers, and "Washington Post" reporter Philip Bump. Philip we'll start off with you. Some of the same things we heard certainly from Donald Trump on the campaign trail, the criticisms of the media, a lot of kind of looking back at the -- at his victory during the election? PHILIP BUMP, WASHINGTON POST REPORTER: Yeah, and I think that the lesson from tonight, is if you thought he's going to moderate from general election, he didn't. He thought he's going to moderate once he won the election, he didn't. And this is -- that -- those are campaign, he should be there I mean, he's already won the campaign but he gave his campaign speech and went after the media. He went after Clinton and Obama and the people at Washington. I mean, he went after everyone who he's been going after for six months. And it was sort of amazing right? And, you know, and I think that the other thing is that in reinforces his idea to be see, he's held consistently and actually brought a forum. Which is that he doesn't need to reach out to other folks to unite and that he expects people to come with him, this was -- that was exactly the ... COOPER: I'm still fascinated by the choice but you can't always get what you want which is what we used on the campaign after the first song after every speech. He's still using, I'm not sure what the message is there but ... DANA BASH, CNN CHIEF POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT: I don't think there is one. I've believe because I've been trying to read into that and (inaudible). And he's not exactly your typical first and to sing at rallies. But I agree, this is just a reminder that this is like nothing we've ever seen before. I mean, we knew that by the end of the campaign. But the question is what kind of president would Donald Trump be? And wow! I mean, it's almost hard to wrap your mind around. I really knew that there were lots of, you know, divisive comments especially and I'm fortunately about the press which is I wish he would just stop doing and not only because we are members of the press, but because as leader of the free world, you do set an example for free press in countries around the world. And so, that was -- I just -- you know, he can't help himself there and I just wish he would figure out a way to stop doing that. But there was a line and I'm just point it up here, that he made that people have been asking him to make about unity and coming together. He said, we denounce all of the hatred and we forcefully reject the language of exclusion and separation and we come together. Now, I've been asking his people, you know, look there a lot of voters who didn't support Donald Trump, who are really fearful. Why not give a unity speech. Well that wasn't a unity speech but that little portion of that campaign speech is more than he's ever done. COOPER: We have that this portion, just listen in. BASH: OK. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) TRUMP: We condemn bigotry, and prejudice in all of its forms. We denounce all of the hatred and we forcefully reject the language of exclusion and separation. We'll going to come together. We have no choice. We have to and it is better, it's better. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: It is interesting David Gergen, I mean, the conversation, you know, that his on -- he joins the teleprompter, he uses it as a touch stone reach for a while and then has the sort of conversational style which has always been incredibly effective certainly for his supporters on that on the campaign trail. DAVID GERGEN, CNN SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST: The alpha male reappeared tonight. COOPER: I mean, I'm talking about announcing who his defense secretary pick is, you know, is in a, you know, it sort of charming way. GERGEN: It was show time and then he couldn't resist. You know, that's the headline, but that wasn't the message. You know, I think there was any doubt that we're putting an end to one chapter of American history and moving on to a new one, he dispelled that doubt out to life. This is goodbye to American leadership in the world. It's goodbye to globalization. He's bringing America home. He's going to lead a nativist, nationalistic, populist movement and if you want to join up with him fine, but if you don't, forget it. COOPER: But I going to say a lot of presidents have started out saying you know what, I'm not talk about nation-building. I'm focusing here at home and world events had led them elsewhere. GERGEN: I got the very clear impression tonight. And I think it's been reinforced in the last few days. What he was looking for is a national security team to whom he's going to entrust most of the stewardship of American foreign policy abroad and what he's going do is focus here at home. He's going to the most domestic president we've have, I started to think at the last 40 or 50 years and he is going to do it in his pugilistic, narcissistic way, he's not going to change. Here is his agenda, he's not moving away from it. And you can -- if you don't like it that's tough, you know, because he's in charge and he has a lot of support in the Congress. And that kind of speech will fire up his base and it is going to leave a lot of other people. I knew I didn't like the son of a bitch. COOPER: Kirsten? KIRSTEN POWERS, CNN PLOTICAL ANALYST: Yeah, I actually think he is actually sending a message with this song. About you can't always get what you want but you get what you need. I think he is saying like America you're what I need, you don't know that you need me, but I'm here basically, and I'm going to be, you know, what you need whether you realize it or not. [20:45:10] And I think the other thing about him is that he gets the stage craft right, in a way, and history Reaganesque is going to way, even though it's different from Reagan obviously. But, you know, he gets the announcing General Mattis there. He does things that are little different even the attack in the meda a little bit. This is become kind of standard now and remember Barack Obama going after Fox News. But, you know, that the ... COOPER: Just last week. POWERS: The supporters -- yes the supporters might right if something that resonates with supporters the feeling the media is out to get you. And so I actually -- I mean I criticized Obama for that and would criticize Trump for this. But I think he understands that and with the Carrier deal, I think he see the same thing it's a stage craft, right. It's even though it's not a solution to the problem, he understands picking up that phone what that does the message sort it sends. COOPER: Jeffrey Lord? JEFFREY LORD, TRUMP SUPPORTER: Presidents of the United States in the past, in our lifetime, if you will, with television have taken to the Oval Office address, to rally the troops, to rally the base. Richard Nixon, Ronald Reagan was great at it, et cetera. This is going to be Donald Trump's version of this. He's going to be out there as legislation gets in front of Congress, he's going to be going out and doing these rallies to rally his base and to turn on the pressure and say go to your congressman and write your congressman. When Reagan did that as David knows from the Oval Office that really worked. COOPER: But he also -- I mean, do you believe he needs this in a way? I mean, he gets something from this ... LORD: Sure. COOPER: ... as well as give some -- get, you know, give something. LORD: Sure, I mean, I think it helps him focus. It helps him keep in touch with people. I mean, his jokes about the guy that we couldn't see the guy in the front of the audience there. I mean I think these impressions register with him as he goes back to do the job. COOPER: Van? VAN JONES, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: You know, it's interesting, I just spent the past several days in the Trump country. I got chance to be in Pennsylvania, Ohio talking to Trump voters. And I got to tell you, that speech sounded differently to his voters. He said now is not the time to downsize our dreams. He said I'm asking you to dream big again. There are people out there who hurting economically and they have felt that the elite's just want them to settle. Just to kind of swallow the technology. Swallow the globalization and settle. And he's pushing back on that. So I think that he's -- there is a reason that, you know, people underestimated him is because they underestimate the pain that he's speaking too. Now I think he's misleading a lot of people. And he's saying he's going to have, you know, more, fracking and bring coal jobs back. Well that is just not possible. If you frack everywhere natural gas will be cheap and you put coal miners out of work. So a promise to one is a lie to another and he does that throughout the speech. But I'd want to make sure that we don't miss that he's giving some medicine out there to people who are hurting. COOPER: Paul? PAUL BEGALA, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: He is. I have written out of 100 of presidential speeches this is unique and I -- like you we struck by how he weaves in and out of the teleprompter. Look at it Bill Clinton used to do that but he still sort of stayed between guardrails, right between the bleaches. This reminds me, this is famous story, maybe a pack for David you might know. But when President Eisenhower gave a speeches, into this speech writers work out, they wrote in all at, we went after the Rose Garden he read the speech, he put it his pocket and said, now I'd like to share a few words of my own. And that's what Trump was doing. COOPER: Well, there was a moment tonight early on where he went off and I think he was kind of reliving the campaign talking about it. And then he was almost going to go back to the teleprompter and then he was like ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Right, right. BEGALA: Exactly. JACK KINGSTON, FORMER GEORGIA CONGRESSMAN: I think it was a unifying speech. So I got to tell you when he says ... GERGEN: Unifying speech. KINGSTON: Yeah, and David I'm going to say, I like the son of a gun from the beginning. They saw are still like the son of a gun. GERGEN: Thank you for the correct. KINGSTON: But, you know, when he says I want to take the rust out of the rust belt. It's exactly what you guys are talking about. Its we want to build it in America, we want to buy in America and then Ohio. Where they were hurt at by NAFTA and Sherrod Brown very liberal Democrats senator, they're as one of the champions to be in anti- NAFTA. I think he was singing the words they wanted to hear. I agree with you on that, Van. JONES: You got -- he's doing some interesting stuff. First of all you have two Trumps. There's teleprompter Trump and then there is terrible Trump is going to say a bunch of mean stuff to basically elite's who are then going to predictably take offense and then, you know, that's going to -- because he does that. But he's also producing two different reality television shows at the same time. One reality TV show is for his base firing them up. But the other is for a very concerned business class that wants to see a little bit more maturity. What's amazing, is he does them both on the set at the same time. He does -- he literally just changes he does one show for this crowd, he changes, he does another show for that crowd. And the fact that we -- that our heads haven't fallen off it does that to our good ... [20:49:59] COOPER: The difference between the prompter and the not prompter. I mean is that, to you where the ... JONES: Yes, look, look. There's somebody writing speeches trying to clam people down, talk about unity that throwaway line about, you know, please don't, you know, be mean to each other. There's somebody ... BASH: A throwaway line, but it's one that he has never give. JONES: And I'm happy to hear it. I hope ... BEGALA: And he read it as if it were a hostage message. Yes, he's not comfortable. (CROSSTALK) KINGSTON: There was a quote in the newspaper today on Marcy Kaptur. Marcy Kaptur, as you know, is a senior veteran congresswoman from Toledo, and she said Hillary Clinton came to my district and stood on the corner of the busiest Amtrak rail exchange in Toledo and talked about Warren Buffett. Did not talk about jobs, did not talk about infrastructure. And she was frustrated in speaking in the context of the Democrats did not speak to the heartland of the issues that were most concerned to them. And that's what Donald Trump was doing tonight, you know, talking about NAFTA, talking about trade, talking about taxes, talking about repealing and replacing Obamacare. BEGALA: I know. KINGSTON: Jobs, jobs ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: ... say about that though. LORD: I spoke today with the leader of a small business association in Pennsylvania. And he said his members are ecstatic at the turn of events because they see taxes coming down, they see regulations starting to be taken off the books here, to give them the ability for economic growth. So they are extremely happy about it. BUMP: At least the issues that working class voters and the business community are not the people that Trump needs to unite with, right? I mean to Mr. Gergen's point, he needs to reach out to the rest of America. He needs to reach out to frankly the America that voted more heavily for Hillary Clinton and voted for him. He needs to reach out to people of color. He needs to reach out to people who were concerned about what his presidency might bring. COOPER: Why does he need to do that? LORD: Why? BUMP: Because he's the president of the United States. And if he wants to talk about unity, it's up to him to some extent ... LORD: He did talk about the African-American community tonight. (CROSSTALK) BUMP: Well, he did, but he did it in the context of look how good my poll numbers were according to the exit poll. GERGEN: Let me follow-up to that. I think Van is right that he speaks very effectively to Middle America, to the working class America, much more effectively and probably most of us here at this table. And I give him a lot of credit for that. I do not think he spoke well to the rest of America. I do not think he spoke well to the Hillary-type people tonight. I don't see what there is out there that they can grab on to. COOPER: Let's just see put when he was off the cuff and -- or at least not on Trump as well. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) TRUMP: Although, we did have a lot of fun fighting Hillary, didn't we? Right? (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Obviously, the crowd is chanting, "Lock her up." It's interesting. Not responding to that kind of walking away and allowing it to happen, but sort of moving down, because obviously he has said that's not on his ... BASH: Right. And, you know, who knows what would have happened if he would said, you know what, like he said to "The New York Times," "The Red Board", you know what, I'm not going to do that and they're good people. I mean they probably would have gone bananas on him. And it pro -- It was not -- It would not have gone well. And he is enough of a stage man and a showman that he understands that. But I actually don't necessarily think that he has to reach out to the people that didn't vote for him. It would be nice if he did. It would be, you know, part of the tradition of presidents-elect and new presidents to do that. But he's not that person. And he's never going to be that person. And he's the guy who America elected. COOPER: And he has the House and the Senate. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Well, you're saying Mitt Romney is representative ... LORD: Well, I think I'm just saying ... (CROSSTALK) LORD: ... particularly out of shape there, so. (CROSSTALK) KINGSTON: Politically speaking, as a Trump supporter and a campaigner, I can tell you, there were some dark and dreary times, September, October, and if you were for Trump, you had to be 100 percent committed. And so I think he was entitled tonight particularly speaking as a supporter to have some rhetorical high fives. I think it was very important to say to the base, you know what, we won, and everybody says it was impossible, but we did it, we broke down that blue wall. I was thinking about tear down that wall, Mr. Gorbachev. I was thinking about, rip it apart, Mr. Trump. I just think that it was a great moment for those of us who went this journey with him. But I do believe that, you know, there is governing and you're going to see more and more of that. There were calls for unity tonight and he did announce the language of extremism and hate. So ... (CROSSTALK) BEGALA: In a Gallup Poll, President-elect Trump is at 42 percent. It's the lowest in history for any incoming president. In history, George W. Bush, who many -- half the country believes stole the election, was at 59 at this point, 59. He came in under much more divisive terms than President-elect Trump did and he did work to unite the country and got the 59 by the stage. Barack Obama of course was at 68 before he entered. [20:55:01] And this is the honeymoon, Mr. President-elect, and you're at 42. If he wants to succeed, he has got to move that number above 50 and keep it above 50 for the entire first year or he won't -- the Democrats can block his legislation. LORD: Well, Mr. Kerry will help him a lot. BEGALA: Kerry will help a lot. GERGEN: Kerry will help on the speech then. BEGALA: I think yes. GERGEN: Kerry was a home run for him. BEGALA: Yes. GERGEN: He's on a roll, generally. But I think together with Paul's point, it does matter whether he amasses a larger, you know, following that he now has, just wait until he gets into a fight about Obamacare, but especially about to get a new fight about Medicare or Medicaid. Those are very, very tough ... JONES: Part of his problem is, I think it was you, Dana that talked about not this conservative populist alliance that he's trying to govern through, where, again, you know, Paul Ryan is in love with the TPP, may elope with the TPP, but meanwhile Trump hates the TPP. So how does that work? He's going to have to reach out. He's on the one hand. He says he's a war hockey. He's going to smash ISIS. On the other hand, he says he's not going to do anything. So whichever way he goes, if he's going to be an isolationist, he has to reach out. If he's going to be a war leader, he has to reach out. He does have to reach out at some point. And I think right now, he feels, you guys told me to reach out the entire campaign and I didn't reach out the entire campaign and I'm President of the United States and you guys are on TV talking about. COOPER: We're talking about reaching out. We had always Elizabeth Warren, Senator Warren, on last night and I kept trying to ask her, "Well, what is your strategy on TPP? I mean you seem aggrieve basically Donald Trump." You both oppose it. Is that something you would work with him on infrastructure?" And she's not willing to say. She's willing to work. I mean it doesn't seem like ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Paul, what do you want to see the Democrats do? Do you want them to do what Mitch McConnell state early on in the Obama administration? BEGALA: I've talk to several of them d they keep coming back to infrastructure and Medicare on the two polls. If he really wants an infrastructure bill, the democrats have wanted one for years. Guess what, there was a bill that Debbie Stabenow had, the senator from Michigan, a Democrat, in 2014 that was called "The Bring Jobs Home Act" and it taxed corporations who shipped jobs overseas and rewarded corporations who brought jobs home. That's exactly the Carrier deal today. The Republicans killed it. Democrats 100 percent Democrats ... (CROSSTALK) BEGALA: When do we should go and nationalize this? That some say he should reach out to Debbie Stabenow right now and say, Senator, what didn't you join with me and we'll pet and take the Carrier and take it nationally? (CROSSTALK) JONES: Why is it that when Democrats propose that stuff, it's called socialism? And when you guys propose it, it's called patriotism? KINGSTON: It's the same thing. On medical savings accounts, so which is part of the Tom Price Plan. Dick Gephardt at one time was a co- sponsor and a supporter of it, but when Obama got into power, oh, MSA, Medical Savings Account, horrible thing, and all he Democrats are started against it. I actually think the American people are fed up with the politics. Elijah Cummings said today he wanted to work -- very liberal Democrat, as you know, he wanted to work with Trump. And I think that's a good sign. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: But, you know, we have bring (inaudible) on last night from -- he move under. She was saying, no Democrats should be the resistance. JONES: That's a split. COOPER: There should be -- you know what? Republicans did it to then President Obama when he first came in. Democrats should - it's pay back, essentially. JONES: Every meeting right now, and I've been in most of them or called in, look, among the progressives is, should it be obstruction, war to the knife, stop this guy everywhere, or should there be a more constructive opposition try to help the country. (CROSSTALK) GERGEN: Which way does he come out? JONES: I don't know yet. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: There's one thing -- you know, that's a -- there's a political discussion on that, but then there's also a governance issue and what's good, you know, what's good for politics and what's good for the country are not the same things. BEGALA: Here's what Trump is going to resolve it for the Democrats. He's going to come with an infrastructure bill that's larded with corporate special interests and the Democrats won't be able to support it. They really want to. They honest did want to put working people back to work. But their fear, at least, on The Hill, and I've talked to a lot of them, is that they're going to load this up with lobbyists and special interests voice and they'll have to oppose it. KINGSTON: I'll disagree and I'll tell you why. BEGALA: I'm not wrong. KINGSTON: Because when President Obama came out with his stimulus bill, without Republican support, then Obama came without the Republican support. It was a mistake. And I think most Democrats would admit that you've got to do these things on a bipartisan fashion. And I believe that what he's going to do is he's going to figure out which Democrats will work with me and how can we get some things done. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: And there may be more Democrats -- I mean, in some of these states, you know, some of these sort of borderline states that are willing to work with him ... (CROSSTALK) GERGEN: But you know, but he never told us how he's going to pay for anything tonight. COOPER: He won't. GERGEN: There was nothing about how do you pay for the taxes, how do you pay for the infrastructure, how do you pay about all of these things. KINGSTON: He's talked about the penny plan, which is a step, and he's talked about repatriation of money. And you cannot do infrastructure or healthcare reform, as we all know, without tax reform. And part of tax reform has always been repatriating that money back home. So that's ... GERGEN: That was not in that speech. (CROSSTALK) KINGSTON: It was not in the speech, but he's been talking about that for weeks now. And the treasury and commerce folks have been talking about it, too. [21:00:05] COOPER: I just want to give a heads up to our viewers. It's the top of the hour. I want to -- appreciate you just joining us. Trump Narrows Secretary of State List to Four; Interview with Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts; Trump's Potential Conflicts of Interests; Death Toll Rises in Tennessee Wildfires; Carrier: Trump Deal Includes "Incentives" To Save 1,000+ Jobs. Aired 8-9p ET Aired November 30, 2016 - 20:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [20:00:15] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening. Thanks for joining us. In an exclusive interview tonight, Senator Elizabeth Warren on whether she thinks she can work with President-elect Donald Trump and why she says her side lost the election. That's coming up in a moment. But, first, we begin with how the Trump administration is coming together. Still no word on who will be the secretary of state, although the list is apparently down to four. But other appointments are coming in. CNN senior White House correspondent Jim Acosta joins me now with the latest. Jim, last time you spoke with you, you were in a New York City restaurant whispering to me on the phone -- JIM ACOSTA, CNN SENIOR WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: That's right. COOPER: -- while watching the meeting between Mitt Romney and Trump. It looks like you paid your bill. You were able to leave. What's the latest on last night's meeting? ACOSTA: We did pay our bill, Anderson, just for the record there. But it looked like as they were picking up their forks, they buried the hatchet. As you were hearing us described it last night, it was a very warm and friendly exchange. The question now is whether or not this was enough to get Mitt Romney the job of secretary of state. I talked to a transition source earlier today who described this meeting as a net positive. That's if you calculate how things went last night and subtract all the negative comments that mitt Romney has had to say about Donald Trump over the past year. But, Anderson, I think the other thing that's important to note is that some of Mitt Romney's detractors like Newt Gingrich or Mike Huckabee were enjoying themselves in various interviews about Romney eating crow and groveling at Donald Trump's feet. And so, perhaps those critics of Mitt Romney have been satisfied in terms of what they saw last night. But at this point, no final decision has been made. COOPER: Beyond secretary of state, there were a number of appointments made today. ACOSTA: That's right. Steve Mnuchin, who was the finance chair for Donald Trump's campaign, he was tapped as the treasury secretary. He's a multimillionaire. Wilbur Ross is a billionaire, who was tapped for secretary of commerce, and a deputy security of commerce was also named, Todd Ricketts from the wealthy Ricketts family in Chicago, that owns the Chicago Cubs. It's giving some Americans, I'm sure, a sense that Donald Trump is putting together not a team of rivals but a team of the super rich. And we should also point out, one other name that was floated out there, Sarah Palin, the former Alaska governor, has been talked about has the next, potentially, Secretary of Veterans Affairs. But I've been told by sources that may be coming more from Sarah Palin's camp than the transition team. COOPER: Donald Trump tweeted he's leaving his business in order to avoid his business operations to avoid conflicts of interest, or I should say business operations. But did he give any real details beyond that? ACOSTA: No, only that he's pulling out of his business, he said, in total in those tweets today. But no talk of whether he's going to put it in a blind trust. He says he's going to be talking about this in a news conference on December 15th with his children. And, Anderson, what has not been resolved is just how all of this will be handled and whether or not his children will have a role in his presidency. Of course, that will also create conflicts of interest if they are in charge of his businesses. But then at the same time, meeting with foreign leaders and so forth, as we've seen so far during this transition process. And keep in mind, Anderson, the Constitution says Donald Trump as president of the United States cannot accept gifts from foreign governments. That is technically something he can be impeached for. And so, these are details we'll be waiting to hear from the president-elect when he holds that news conference. COOPER: All right. Jim Acosta -- Jim, thanks. President-elect Trump's choice for treasury secretary is drawing a new round of fire from Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren who has been, obviously, very vocal about several of Trump's appointments. I spoke with Senator Warren exclusively shortly before (INAUDIBLE). (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Senator Warren, earlier today, you said that the pick of Steve Mnuchin, quote, "should send shivers down the spine of any American who got hit during the financial crisis." Is that fair? I mean, should no one who worked then in finance during that time be eligible? SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN (D), MASSACHUSETTS: No. But that's not really the point. I mean, look at it this way. What happened is the Wall Street bankers crashed the economy. They got bailed out. And nobody went to jail. That made the American people really, really furious. They're still angry about it. Donald Trump tapped into that anger, and he promised when he was running for president that he would break the connection between Wall Street and this Congress. He said he was going to separate that from the government, no more revolving door. He wasn't going to do that sort of thing. And then what does he do? He turns around and picks a guy who had actually been one of the people who helped do all of those lousy mortgages that not only broke the economy but broke millions of families. And then after the crash, a guy who turned around and bought a bank that then became infamous for how hard it squeezed families that had already been cheated and was the foreclosure machine following that. [20:05:03] You know, the American people -- this is a guy who also said today that he wants to roll back the Wall Street regulations. The American people are furious over what Wall Street has done. They don't want somebody who is going to come in here and say, hey, let's help Wall Street. And what Donald Trump is doing is he's literally handing the keys to the Treasury over to a Wall Street banker who helped cause the crash. COOPER: Mnuchin, though, speaking about himself and also about Wilbur Ross, who's Trump's pick to run Commerce, said and I quote, "One of the good things about both Wilbur and I, we've actually been bankers, we were the only two people during the financial crisis that were issued licenses by the government. We've been in the business of regional banks and we understand what it is to make loans." I mean, Donald Trump talked about not wanting Washington insiders. You can argue Mnuchin has never held a government post. I know he's obviously a financial insider. Isn't Trump doing what he promised? WARREN: No. Donald Trump promised he was not going to have a government that was going to work for Wall Street. He promised he was not going to have a revolving door. He criticized how close the connection is between Wall Street and this government. And he promised he would stand on the side of the American people, he was not going to stand with Wall Street. And then he turns around and his first big economic appointment is to appoint a Wall Street insider, a guy who made millions of dollars off mortgages that crushed families financially. That's who it is he's putting in charge here. COOPER: Do you approve of any of the president-elect's cabinet picks today? WARREN: Well, you know, I don't know. Today he just talked about having the U.S. attorney, Preet Bharara, down, and I think Preet is a pretty terrific guy. So, maybe it will turn out that he'll have one of these appointments. I don't know at this point. COOPER: But no one he's selected so far? WARREN: Well, look, so far, what we have seen is that Donald Trump has doubled down on racism and bigotry. He's got as his strategic adviser, a person who is a white supremacist and he's now doubling down -- COOPER: Wait a minute. There's no evidence he's a white supremacist. He obviously -- you know, there's people who are white supremacists who support Donald Trump and who support like Breitbart or Steve Bannon. But -- WARREN: Come on. COOPER: Well, I mean -- WARREN: Are we really -- I mean, Steve Bannon has certainly associated himself with white supremacists. Will you go that far? COOPER: I mean, I don't know that you can say, though, he's a white supremacist. WARREN: Well, he has associated himself with white supremacists, is that close enough? I mean, this is a guy whose appointment is applauded by the KKK. I mean, what Donald Trump is doing is he's putting, so far, he has said that he's going to go forward on bigotry and that he's going to go forward on wall street insiders. And I think this is a real problem for the American people. I don't think this is where the American people want to go. You know -- COOPER: Weeks ago, though, you called on Donald Trump to get rids lobbyists in his transition team. WARREN: Yes. COOPER: Subsequently, they did purge lobbyists. Do you give Trump any credit for that because -- WARREN: Of course. I'm very glad to see that they got rid of lobbyists, or at least made them dropped their lobbying affiliation while they were there. We're never entirely clear on the details. But, yes, of course. It is better when they're not using lobbyists, and it would be even better if they were not using Wall Street insiders to run the economic system of the United States. COOPER: Is there a chance for common ground between you and other Democrats and a Trump administration? I mean, things like infrastructure spending, opposition to TPP, support for reviving Glass-Steagall, which is an old law separating commercial investment banking? I mean, would you work with Donald Trump on these and any other issues? WARREN: Look, I think the real question is, how does Donald Trump want to run his administration? If he wants to run his administration on bigotry and on Wall Street insiders' trickle-down economics that helps a handful of people at the top and leaves everybody else behind -- I can't be part of that. And I don't think that's where Democrats are. But to your question -- COOPER: So, even if there are certain issues that you agree with? That you can make progress on? Because a lot of Americans are sick of gridlock. WARREN: You know, I think what a lot of Americans are sick of is a government that works for those at the top. I think that Donald Trump tapped into that anger. And now, Donald Trump is doing a 180 degrees on it, and he's putting Wall Street insiders into exactly the jobs where he criticized Wall Street insiders before. COOPER: You've asked -- WARREN: We need people if the government here who work on behalf of the American people, who aren't caught up in a Wall Street mentality and certainly not people who made their fortune by turning families upside down on lousy mortgages that tricked and trapped people. [20:10:04] COOPER: You've asked the GAO, the Government Accountability Office, to look into Trump's overseas business ties and potential conflicts of interests. WARREN: Yes. COOPER: Earlier today, President-elect Trump said he would take steps to separate himself from what he's called the business operations of the company. What would be enough from your perspective? Because, again, we don't know the details of what that means. Is him maintaining ownership OK? As you know, legally, he doesn't have to have a blind trust. WARREN: Yes. Well, look, the question is, how is he really going to separate himself? I'm glad to hear that he has said he's going to move in that direction. I think, obviously, he was feeling a little heat about that and felt like he needed to respond. But it is as so often the case, the devil is in the details. Is he really going to have a separation where had he doesn't know what advances Trump interests? And foreign governments, for example, don't know what would advance Trump interests. If they both know what advanced Trump interests, this isn't about formal ownership. This is about whether or not you have got a conflict of interest. Whether or not Donald Trump is actually working for the American people or just working for Trump enterprises. COOPER: What about the Carrier deal? I mean, again, we don't know details about how it came about. The company announced it would keep about a thousand jobs in Indiana. Is that a step in the right direction? Do you give Trump for credit that? WARREN: Look, jobs -- COOPER: And, I guess the question is, why isn't that something President Obama could have done? WARREN: Yes, jobs are good. The question is, what exactly is the deal? I mean, the first thing you learn when you're talking about deals is let's read all of the details. Let's read the fine print. You know, how much government money has gone into this. What kind of jobs are they? I just want to know the details. COOPER: Right. WARREN: This -- you just don't know enough yet to know how this one has worked out. COOPER: I want to ask you about the recount efforts led by Jill Stein. WARREN: Sure. COOPER: She formally filed for recount in Michigan today. Do you support this? Because she offers no actual evidence of fraud. I mean, she admits she doesn't have any actual evidence of hacking or fraud. Potential hacking is something the FBI is already investigating. So, is this really necessary? WARREN: Well, look, if -- I think that it is important for all of us to have confidence in the electoral system and ensure that -- COOPER: But is she raising -- I mean, is she raising doubts unfairly about the electoral system? WARREN: How is it raising doubts to do an audit? You know, if that's what comes out of this is they re-audit and they say, here are the numbers and we double and triple checked them and we're absolutely positively sure that these are the right numbers -- I don't see how that raises doubts. I think what that raises is confidence. COOPER: Laurence Tribe from Harvard, a Harvard professor, recently said that even though recounts are within the law, Stein is most likely doing in his opinion, quote, "to gain attention and establish herself as a national player." She's raising millions of dollars for recount. She's building probably a mailing list of those who donate. WARREN: Yes. Look, if what she's going to do is say, let's double and triple check the numbers and people want to contribute to that effort, then they should be able to. And I think that should boost our confidence in the electoral system. I'd like to know that every vote in America was counted. I'd like to know that every one of those votes gets counted. I think that helps on credibility overall. COOPER: Looking back at the election, was Secretary Clinton simply the wrong candidate for the moment? Could Senator Sanders have been the right candidate? Could he have possibly won? (END VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Well, in a momentum we'll have Senator Warren's answer to that question. The rest of our exclusive interview when we come back. Also ahead, the death tool climbing in Tennessee where wildfires have destroyed hundreds of buildings, families are desperate to find missing relatives. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:17:15] COOPER: In the wake of Hillary Clinton's defeat, one of her biggest campaign surrogates, Senator Elizabeth Warren has made it clear that she's prepared to wage battle with the Trump administration and the new Congress come January. Here's part two of my exclusive interview with the senator. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Looking back at the election was Secretary Clinton simply the wrong candidate for the moment? Could Senator Sanders have been the right candidate? Could he have possibly won? WARREN: You know, I -- this is not about looking backwards. This is about what we're going to do now. But let's keep in mind that Senator Clinton got about 2.3 million more votes than Donald Trump did and that Democrats took seats in both the House and Senate away from the Republicans. So, I think what happens next is how it is that we drive forward on a message about economic growth and actually come up with the ideas and work for the American people? We've had enough of Republican trickle-down economic works for people at the top and doesn't work for anyone else. COOPER: But as Democrats, I mean, is this -- WARREN: We need to make this economy work. COOPER: But as Democrats, it is disingenuous to say you're not going to look back. Obviously, Democrats are going to look back very closely what happened. Many of the Senate candidates you in fact backed, Feingold in Wisconsin, McGinty in Pennsylvania lost. I mean -- WARREN: Yes. COOPER: To many Democrats, even the party seems in disarray. What is your message to those who didn't vote for Donald Trump about the next four years? How are you approaching these next four years? And I guess it goes back to the question of common ground. You are essentially saying even if there's areas, the TPP, Glass-Steagall, infrastructure, that you might agree with Donald Trump on, are you saying you will not work with him on those issues? WARREN: No. What I have said and what I'll say about how we go forward is you start with core principles. And I think it means to be a Democrat. I think it means that we believe in respect and dignity for every human being. And I also believe that it means we believe in building economic opportunity. Not just for those at the top but economic opportunity for everyone. I think those are the principles on which the Democratic Party stands and those are the principles on which we will go forward. COOPER: But there are also politics obviously involved and you as a party and you as a senator have to figure out, you know, do you confront every step of the way? Do you work with? Do you reach a hand across the aisle when you think there are issues you can do good on? WARREN: Look, I've been doing that for the four years I've been here. I have worked with Republicans -- I have worked with Republicans on different bills. Right now, we've got a 21st Century Cures Act that's on floor. I took to the floor on Monday to talk about how terrible I thought that bill was. And at least there is some good in it. [20:20:00] The bill is now -- the bill is now better than it was. Yes, this is part of what we do. COOPER: So, would you be willing to work with the Trump administration? WARREN: Like I said, it depends on what's happening here. If Donald Trump wants to run an administration based on bigotry and he wants to follow through on trickle-down economics, run an economy that only works for those at the top, and doesn't work for anyone else, then I can't help on that. Those are not the things that I stand for, and I think those are not the things that Democrats stand for. COOPER: So, even if there's more infrastructure spending, which is something you support, in general, if it's not done in the way -- you know, if it's done through lowering taxes or corporate incentives. WARREN: If it's done to try to help -- if it's done to try to help those at the top and it's not actually going to provide jobs and economic growth and opportunity for the rest of America -- you know, you can't just slap a name on something and say, gee, would you automatically sign up for this. What it's really about are those core principles. You know, we believe in dignity for everyone. That's what it's about. That's where you start. That's the stuff you don't negotiate over. And the rest of it, we really believe in building economic opportunity. We now have an economy that is working great. It's working great for those right at the top. And everybody else in this economy is being left behind. This isn't just about the poor. This is about working families. This is about middle class families. This is about upper middle class families. This is about people who worry that they can't afford to educate their children. This is about people who worry that they can't afford to retire. This is about people who see no economic future for themselves and others like themselves. We have to do better than that as a country. We once built an America that worked, not just for those at the top. It worked across a full range. We weren't perfect. But we were bending it in the right direction. And for 30 years now, we've done trickle-down economics and it has been an ugly mix of deregulation and just writing one law after another that helps those at the top. COOPER: But -- WARREN: Tax cuts for the big guys, no spending for anybody else. COOPER: As you know, though -- WARREN: We have to reverse that. COOPER: When you take a look at that electoral map, I mean, there's blue on both coasts, basically, and a lot of red in the entire rest of the country. Do you feel like you're out of touch? That's what the Republicans say about you, that you're out of touch. WARREN: Out of touch, when 2.3 million more people voted for the Democratic candidate than the Republican candidate? When the Democrats picked up seats in the Senate and the Republicans lost? When the Democrats picked up seats in the House of Representatives and the Republicans lost? You know, let's be clear. We are not the minority here. We are the party of opposition. COOPER: But it sounds like you're saying you won but you didn't. What went wrong? WARREN: Look, what I'm saying is that more Americans agreed on -- with the Democratic candidate for president than agreed with the Republican for president. And not by a little bit. She won by a substantial margin. Indeed, as the numbers keep coming in, that margin continues to grow. COOPER: But you're talking about an economic message that is not resonating with voters in Rust Belt States, even the term Rust Belt is offensive. But in those states, where people are hurting, your message is not resonating. WARREN: And that's what I was -- that's what I was just talking about. We're talking about an economy that for more than 30 years has been effectively a trickle-down economy. This economy has been full of deregulation, so Wall Street could do better. And what's happening? Donald Trump's turning around and appointing the ultimate Wall Street insider -- I think he's called "Mr. Wall Street" -- to come in and have the keys to the Treasury. We need an economy that works across the range, that produces good jobs, produces a future. (CROSSTALK) COOPER: But it sounds like you're telling those workers -- WARREN: -- opportunity all across the range. COOPER: Sorry to interrupt. It sounds -- it sounds like you're telling those workers who are out of jobs who voted for Donald Trump in Ohio and other places that they just were mistaken, that they were sold a bill of goods, that they don't understand what's in their best interests. WARREN: Well, I'm sorry, Anderson. Did you just hear what we said about Donald Trump? He promised he was going to run this government for the American people and not for Wall Street. And what he's just done is he's just put a Wall Streeter in charge of the Treasury, and not just a random one. A guy who actually helped package all of those toxic mortgages. A guy who bought a bank that made its fortune by squeezing people hard on foreclosure. That's the person who is going to be the chief economic officer of the United States. I mean, Donald Trump is the one who said one thing during the campaign and now has reversed that by 180 degrees by what he is actually doing. [20:25:10] COOPER: Senator Elizabeth Warren, I appreciate your time. Thank you. WARREN: You bet. (END VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Well, lots to talk about with the panel. Joining me tonight, CNN political commentator, Peter Beinart, contributor at "The Atlantic". National MoveOn.org spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre, CNN political analyst and "USA Today" columnist, Kirsten Powers, CNN political commentator and Trump supporter, Kayleigh McEnany, CNN political analyst and "New York Times" national political reporter, Alex Burns, and CNN political commentator and Trump supporter, Alice Stewart. Peter, I mean, it is difficult obviously a position for the Democrats to be in and for Senator Warren. Now, the Democrats trying to figure out are they now just the party of opposition? Do they try to find common ground with Donald Trump and the Republicans? Because there are some issues where they theoretically could? PETER BEINART, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: I don't think there are going to be a lot frankly. I mean, I think, even if you look at the Trump infrastructure, given what we know of the Trump plan, which is basically a give away in terms of tax incentives to wealthy developers rather than government money, I don't think there is going to be a lot of overlap. But I do think that Elizabeth Warren has an opportunity because she's an authentic populist. She, for her entire career, has been in genuine opposition to the powers that be in the American financial and corporate system. Donald Trump is a sham populist. He's a bogus populist. He's a guy who made all kind of claims how much he hates Goldman Sachs during the campaign, final commercial of his campaign, and lo and behold, he's got a treasury secretary from Goldman Sachs, he's got a senior counsel from Goldman Sachs. And now, we hear that his OMB head maybe from Goldman Sachs. Elizabeth Warren has an opportunity because she's a real deal and Trump is a fake. COOPER: Karine, is it hypocritical for Donald Trump -- is he going back on campaign promises? KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, CLINTON SUPPORTER: Yes, it's easy question to answer. Look, stepping on the Goldman Sachs thing for a second, they had a -- their stock went up nine-year high. It went up 3 percent today. Why did they go up? Because, now, they have access to the White House now. Three executives that are going to be part of the cabinet. And I think yes. He was supposed to be a man of the people. He was supposed to make sure that, you know, there wasn't going to be a revolving door, and he's doing the complete opposite of what he promised his own supporters the last, you know, 18 months. COOPER: Kayleigh, is this a betrayal? KAYLEIGH MCENANY, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: No, I don't think so at all. Just because someone has Goldman Sachs on their resume doesn't mean they are a bad Wall Street person who should never be qualified to run anything in government, solely because they happen to work at a certain organization or bank. So, no. Just because he appointed people that have this as part of their pedigree, that doesn't mean that they're not going to implement the policies that he promised. Namely, the fact they are going to be tax breaks for all. He's going remedy some of the trade imbalances. And just quickly to Peter's point, you say that Elizabeth Warren is an authentic populist and I find it hard to believe that when she was pushed on Hillary Clinton by Anderson and she never pointed out the fact that the DNC rigged the election in favor of the Hillary Clinton. If you're an authentic populist, I would think you would take -- have the guts to stand up for Bernie Sanders who should have -- been given more of a chance and the powers that be shouldn't have suppressed him and his supporters the way that they did. And for her not standing up for that, it doesn't quite ring authentically. (LAUGHTER) COOPER: Kirsten, what do you make -- BEINART: It's all a red herring but OK. COOPER: Kirsten, what do you make of Steve Mnuchin, some of the other choices he's made? KIRSTEN POWERS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, I mean, I think it is true that these people are -- he did specifically attack Goldman Sachs. He attacked Hillary for her ties to Goldman Sachs. He attacked Ted Cruz for ties to Goldman Sachs, claiming that basically Goldman Sachs owned Ted Cruz. So, I think that perhaps he should address this. What does this mean? But I also think, Kayleigh, as to your point, that it does ultimately depend on what these people are going to do in terms of policies and Steve Mnuchin has said, it's going to be across the board tax cuts, it's not just going to be tax cuts for rich people. It's going to be tax cuts for the middle class as well. So, we have to wait and see what the actual policy is going to be. COOPER: I know the supporters of the Steve Mnuchin point out is that he hasn't held government office before, so that he's not viewed as a Washington insider, though clearly he's a financial insider. ALEX BURNS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Yes, and I think one of the things that we found during the campaign is that there are a lot of different kinds of insiders that the American people don't care for, right? That there were people during the Republican primaries who thought that because I've only been a governor, I've never been to Washington I don't count as an insider. And, in fact, if you are Scott Walk or Jeb Bush, voters still see you as a part of the political class. I do think that -- you know, everybody is pretty much acknowledging here that the American people don't care for Wall Street, and they don't care for people who come out of the belly of that particular beast, and I do think this Trump has set a pretty high bar for himself to clear in terms of how he's perceived as treating industry relative to regular people. COOPER: They did move off the lobbyists who they had in the transition, which is one of the criticism Senator Warren had made. But do you think this is a mistake to reach out to Goldman Sachs folks? ALICE STEWART, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: I think these are men who are extremely accomplished in the business and financial world. They helped to craft Donald Trump's populist economic reforms that he's going implement in the White House and reforms he outlined to the American people that voted for him and now, he's the president elect. And for Warren to be critical of their Wall Street insider, as she calls it, that is just experience they have coming to the table. [20:30:02] They know how the system works. And they know how the system is rigged. COOPER: She's very critical though of Mnuchin's particular experience at a small bank where he took over and also -- but we're going to talk more with the panel right when we come back, after this short break. Also ahead the president-elect tweeted that he's going to step away from running the business operations of his company to avoid the appearance of conflict of interest. Is that may enough to satisfy critics? We'll talk about that ahead. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: We've been talking about Senator Elizabeth Warren's strong opposition to Donald Trump's pick for a treasury secretary. She says the way Trump's administration is coming together, shows he has no intention of draining the swamp as he promised. Here again is -- some of what Senator Warren said just a short time ago. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN, (D) MASSACHUSETTS: He promised when he was running for president that he would break the connection between Wall Street and this Congress. He said he was going to separate that from the government. No more revolving door. He wasn't going to do that sort of thing. And then what does he do? He turns around and picks a guy who had actually been one of the people who helped do all of those lousy mortgages, that not only broke the economy but broke millions of families. [20:35:11] And then after the crash a guy who turned around and bought a bank that then became infamous for how hard it squeezed families, that had already been cheated. And was the foreclosure machine following that. The American people are furious over what Wall Street has done. They don't want somebody who's going to come in here and say hey let's help Wall Street. And what Donald Trump is doing is he's literally handing the keys to the treasury over to a Wall Street bank who are helped cause the crash. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: And back to the panel. Karine, you know, a lot of Democrats obviously criticize Republicans for just completely trying to block then President Barack Obama in his first term. Just from the get-go, isn't them same -- I mean is it fair now to make the same criticism, it sounds like what Democrats are planning to do -- I mean whether they're able to do, because they don't have power in either House. JEAN-PIERRE: I got to tell you Anderson, I'm all for it. I mean on January 20th of 2009 Republicans met at some steakhouse in D.C. talked about how they were going to make President Brarack Obama a one term president. So -- and ... COOPER: But they got huge criticism from Democrats ... PIERRE: Yeah. COOPER: ... the time, they said look that not how government. You know, that's not how we function. PIERRE: I hear you, is how government work, but this is a guy who, you know, there is no two Donald Trump. There is one Donald Trump which is the campaign Donald Trump. We see this from the cabinet picks that he is chosen. COOPER: So payback is OK? PIERRE: It's more about being part of the resistance and being part of saying to the American people we have your back. Because like Elizabeth Warren said, 2.3 million vote -- more votes ... COOPER: Kirsten? (CROSSTALK) COOPER: She say is having a back. Tell theirs ... KRISTEN POWERS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: It's what I say. People just want to own up to the hypocrisy then that's OK. But move -- it's Democrat have been talking about this non stop for the last eight years. Basically that this was a strategy. So I think that it's actually -- it is a good strategy and that is what Democrats saw and that -- because what happens is the president is the one who wins if there's bipartisanship. So if Democrats start working with Trump then people will say oh Washington is functioning and that's good for the president. So I then to say a good strategy, it's extremely electoral strategy, it's not good for the country. It's a good electoral strategy. COOPER: Peter? PETER BEINART, THE ATLANTIC CONTRIBUTOR: I actually don't think it's hypocrisy. I think there is an important different (ph), the question is what is the agenda the president is pushing. Barack Obama's agenda if you look at his healthcare plan was basically largely taken from a Republican plan in Massachusetts, his infrastructure plan, right to his stimulus plan had huge number of tax cut which is Republicans liked and the Republicans still opposed it. If Donald Trump comes forward with that kind of ideological centrist proposal on infrastructure, he'll get Democratic support. But if he comes up with proposal which is a hard write proposal, that's different then what Barack Obama did. COOPER: Is it hypocrisy? STEWART: Warren, talking about the building economic opportunities and great passion she had. If the Democrats would have won -- run on that and had a candidate that wasn't flawed they might have won, let's -- her ideas she put forward tonight, those are great ideas, they should have them in the campaign. But look moving forward and she shouldn't be looking at what these guys have done in the past, she needs to look at what's the plan for the future and as Kayleigh had mentioned, the economic plan that is on the table that Donald Trump has with regard to pro growth tax, unleashing American energy. Renegotiating trade deals and looking at bilateral agreements with other countries. These are plans that will work and they will grow and that look there are 1,000 employees that Carrier in Indiana who have seen the benefits of these plans. COOPER: Alex? ALEX BURNS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Well look, this is a real debate that's going on within the Democratic Party right now. Right, that they there are folks like Elizabeth Warren who feel like just draw the line in the sand and do not let him step across it. There are other folks are who -- no, I think Chuck Schumer had signaled that he maybe among them, who see Donald Trump as not a conventional Republican. As a guy who's been extremely idealogically flexible over time. He's a negotiator. He's a guy who doesn't like being unpopular and doesn't particularly like, you know, facing blow back face to face from people. So if you get in the room with him, this is the alternative theory of the case, I'm not saying it's a better theory in the case, but the alternative theory in the case is get a table with him and talk him into a different position or at least just appeal to his kind of natural negotiating tendencies. MCENANY: To Kristen's point, you know, Kristen mentioned and she's absolutely right, that when you have bipartisanship the president wins, the governing party tends to win. So I think every Democrat is going face an important choice, to what do you prioritize? Policy or politics. He's prioritize policy, he prioritize getting rid of the bad trade deals if you will put your money where your mouth is, you're going to side with Donald Trump on something, if you prioritize politics then you are going sit on the side lines and probably pay the debt for that. COOPER: All right, I want thank everybody. Trump tweeted that he'll have a press conference with his kids in a few weeks to discuss stepping away from operating his businesses, to non ownership but operating them to avoid the appearance of the conflicts of the interest as president. [20:40:00] We'll talk about that next. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: The potential conflicts of interest between business and the presidency or unprecedented obviously in the upcoming Trump administration. Today, Trump signaled he's aware of that, tweeting, "I will be holding a major news conference in New York city with my children in December 15th to discuss the fact that I will be leaving my great business in total, in order to fully focus on running the country, in order to make America great again, while I'm not mandated to do this under the law, I feel is visually important as president to in no way have a conflict of interest with my various businesses, hence legal documents are being crafted which take me completely out of business operations. The presidency is a far more important task." Joining me to discuss, Michael D'Antonio, author of the "Truth About Trump", Timothy O'Brien, executive editor of Bloomberg View and author of "Trump Nation: The Art of Being the Donald. Also CNN political commentator and Trump supporter, Kayleigh McEnany. Tim, I mean you said that the only way President-elect Trump can really avoid a financial conflict is to also insulate and isolate his kids. What do you mean by that? TIMOTHY O'BRIEN, BLOOMBERG VIEW EXECUTIVE EDITOR: There so deeply embedded in his business, he said that he would create a blind trust and lead them in charge at the business, but that's of course it's not a blind trust, it is real that his children are involved in the business. [20:45:04] He's also said that he's son-in-law Ivanka Trump's husband is a candidate for senior White House advisory position and there's just going to be this great conflation of information between policy making apparatuses in the White House and Trump Organization deal making, and there's no real buffer being established between the children, the business and Donald Trump's White House activities. COOPER: So you're saying the children, if they were running the company, would not be -- would have to not have any role in the White House at all or any kind of advisory role. O'BRIEN: Correct. And they already do. They're on the transition team. Ivanka Trump has sat in on meetings with foreign dignitaries and diplomats. Jared Kushner's obviously been in important force in -- on the Trump team. And as long as that presence exists, there not a -- there's always going to be a conflict of interest looming over this White House that every step of the way in any policy decision. And I think it really comes down to Donald Trump either getting a fully independent third party to run his businesses or selling them off. COOPER: Kayleigh, the other question I guess is about ownership of the properties. Does Donald Trump continue to own them? He said he's going to remove himself from business operations which sounds like just David Day (ph) kind of running of a company but not the ownership itself. Is that enough you think? MCENANY: I think that's enough. Look, the American people elected him knowing that he had $10 billion brand. They elected him ... COOPER: And knowing that it was a complex structure. MCENANY: Knowing that it was a complex, that's exactly right and knowing that the children were advisors and we're going to take over the company. That was what was always said. My kids are going to take over. It's unprecedented situation. We've never seen anything like it before and that's why the onus is on Donald Trump to consult with White House counsel which he said he's going to Reince Priebus has said he's going to do to ensure every step he takes is not in conflict with ... COOPER: So to Tim's point though, do you think that the adult children should not have an advisory role if they are running the company? MCENANY: I think they can maintain an advisory role. Look, the special situation we set up with the Clinton Foundation was that the onus was on her to draw the line. Now, the same onus is on the Trump children to draw the line between their role in advising their dad and their role in working in the company. I do think that it's doable. I do think it's possible. And I do think that Donald Trump is the person that can make this work in the way the Clintons did not. COOPER: Mike, I know you've been -- Mike, have you been very focused on the overseas component of Donald Trump's businesses, which are many -- and we don't, frankly, a lot about -- a lot of them. You've argued that the real estate intercalary in other countries can be swamps to put Trumps words unto themselves. MICHAEL D'ANTONIO, AUTHOR, "THE TRUTH ABOUT TRUMP": Well absolutely. So there's nothing more political than the real estate business especially when you go to a place like India or Turkey. In India just about every real estate developer has a member of parliament that -- his or her member of parliament. There is nothing here that's comparable to the Clinton Foundation which did charitable work overseas. This is a for profit -- really hundreds of for profit entities. COOPER: You need politicians to grant you licenses ... D'ANTONIO: Yeah. Zoning. There's so much in the real estate business that is politically fraud and corrupt. I mean, you know, there are so many payoffs that take place ... COOPER: And you believe that his children also, if they are running, cannot -- I mean you agree with Tim? D'ANTONIO: Oh there's -- right. There is this whole problem of appearance. Even if there's not approved conflict and someone is not taking money. How can you be engage with a public official in the Philippines in a real estate project but also do diplomacy with them? I just think that this is incredibly complicated. And the onus is on Donald Trump and he's going to have to go a little bit further than just saying it's OK. COOPER: I mean, would it be possible for Donald Trump or incredibly difficult for Donald Trump not just to get out of business operations as he says he will do but to -- which seems relatively easy, but to get out of actual ownership? To actually sell stuff? O'BRIEN: We've talked about this before and it actually isn't complex. I've noticed before anything on your show, the media routinely says that Donald Trump has a vast real estate empire, but it's neither vast nor an empire. It's a very lucrative set of holdings he owns outright and independently only one commercial building in the United States. He owns 12 golf courses. Three of them are overseas. He's got other hotel or real estate partnerships where in many cases he's a minority investor. Almost everything he does overseas are licensing operations. You could easily set up a third person, third party to oversee all of those licensing deals. And the holdings in the U.S. could be liquidated relatively painlessly. And Trump himself has said he got in to this campaign to make America great again, not to make money. And I think we're now at a moment where he can demonstrate that to the public. [20:50:00] COOPER: Michael, Kayleigh, Tim, thanks so much, I appreciate it. O'BRIEN: Thank you, Anderson. MCENANY: Thanks. COOPER: We'll going to have more on the breaking news, the death toll rising in Tennessee. Wildfires rain is finally falling tonight in the area but is it helping fire crews? We'll look at that, when we continue. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: More breaking news from Gatlinburg, Tennessee tonight with the death toll from the wildfires has risen to seven. It could climb even higher. A lot of families say they cannot find loved ones. Take a look at what firefighter's face on Monday night when the fire first quickly spread. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) (CROSSTALK) (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: OK. Seeing more than 700 structures are destroyed or damage so far. The flames have been fueled by high winds, but tonight a shift in the weather may help firefighters. Our meteorologist Jennifer Gray is in Gatlinburg tonight. So I know the area has received some rain. Has it helped? JENNIFER GRAY, AMS METEOROLOGIST: It's helped but it's also hurt, and the reason is because you're getting this rain. Of course it's been official but at the same time you're getting really high winds that come in ahead of these storms. [20:55:02] We've also gotten a lot of cloud-to-ground lightning as well during the next -- for the last 24 hours. And so while the rain has helped contain those fires, the high wind and the lightning has helped spark a few new ones We think, overall, the number of fires has gone down dramatically. The rain has definitely helped but of course this area still needs much more. People have hiked up to these areas that have been charred where the fires were in areas that are no longer burning, they can still feel the heat underneath their feet. And so, even though the fire is out, Anderson, a lot of these areas are still smoldering right underneath the ground. COOPER: I mean, have people started to return to their home in some areas? GRAY: Some people have. But for the majority, people haven't. There are still a couple hundred people in this evacuation center where we are, and unfortunately, tomorrow morning they're going to wake up on day three still not knowing when they can return home and if they can return home, they are not going to be sure if there's even going to be a home. As you said, the 700 or more structures have been burned. This has been a living nightmare for people who had to flee with just the shirts on their back, Anderson. COOPER: Yeah, a lot of people may need help after this. Jennifer Gray, thank you so much. There's much more ahead in the next hour of "360" including breaking news on the Trump deal to save Carrier jobs here in the U.S. The president-elect keeping a campaign promises, a success story for the incoming administration. How the Trump team made it happened and what we know about the deal so far. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:00:10] COOPER: Thanks for joining us for a second hour of "360." Carrier: Trump Deal Includes "Incentives" To Save 1,000+ Jobs; Trump's DC Hotel: It's Complicated; Trump Vows to Leave His Business "In Total"; Secretary Of State Field Narrows; No Charges for Officer Who Killed NC Man; Inventor of the Big Mac Dies At 98. Aired 9-10p ET Aired November 30, 2016 - 21:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [21:00:10] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Thanks for joining us for a second hour of "360." Last night around this time ago, where the President-elect Trump and Carrier, the air conditioning and heating manufacture who reached a deal to keep about a thousand jobs in the U.S., it was a promise that Trump made early in his campaign. Today, Carrier confirmed that he's going to continue to make gas furnaces in Indianapolis, a move it says will save more than a thousand jobs that would have been lost to Mexico. Carrier released a statement saying and I quote, "Today's announcement is possible because of the incoming Trump-Pence administration has emphasized to us its commitment to support the business community and create an improve, more competitive U.S. business climate. The incentives offered by the state were an important consideration. Statement went on to say this agreement in no way diminishes our belief in the benefits of free trade and that the forces of globalization will continue to require solutions for the long-term competitiveness of the U.S. and American workers moving forward." Now the details the deal are not yet known but for Carrier employees, there's no a question at Christmas has come early. Martin Savidge tonight reports. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) MARTIN SAVIDGE, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Employee reaction to the Trump- Carrier deal ranges from celebration. ROBERT PRICE, CARRIER WORKER: I'm ecstatic. You know, this is -- it just I double a smile on my face. SAVIDGE: To surprise. DENISE GIBBS, CARRIER WORKER: I was surprised, definitely a surprised. SAVIDGE: To disbelief. PATRICK LEATH, CARRIER WORKER: A part of me is happy. But a part of me is still saying, you know, is this really true, because we are business back in February that the company is leaving. I mean, they've made that known. SAVIDGE: That they did. Here's Carrier last spring, breaking the news to its 1,400 employees saying it had reached a decision. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Is to move production from our facility in Indianapolis to Monterey, Mexico. SAVIDGE: Employees never saw it coming. GIBBS: Yeah, definitely devastated, unexpected at my age, I was just wondering, what can I do? SAVIDGE: Now nine months later, another bolt from the blue tweeted by Carrier. "We are pleased to have reached a deal with President-elect Trump and VP-elect Pence to keep close to 1,000 jobs in Indy." That was followed quickly by Trump saying, "We will keep our companies and jobs in the U.S. Thanks, Carrier. They're not celebrating, they're not cheering, they're not ... GIBBS: No because there's they're just not sure. SAVIDGE: That's because other than saying there is a deal, hardly any information has being revealed about what is the deal. So what is that you still want to hear? BRIAN TAYOR, CARRIER WORKER: Will we keep the same pay, one, two, how long will it stay? SAVIDGE: The arrangement keeps close to a thousand jobs. But Carrier employs over 1400 in Indianapolis, begging the question, just whose job is saved and whose isn't? So what have people have work on the assembly line saying? GIBBS: I mean, some, some are confident. Some are, you know, some are really happy. Some are like me, kind of skeptical and unsure really, how it's going to really play out. SAVIDGE: And that's not all. Just about a mile from the Carrier facility sits Rexnord another manufacturing plant. Last month, it announced it, too, was moving to Mexico, taking more than 300 jobs with it. The Carrier rescue brings mixed feelings. The people of Rexnord they have got to be happy for their friends at Carrier but then they also say, what about my job? CHUCK JONES, REXNORD UNION LEADER: Yeah, that's what they are saying. So, you know, there's some optimism there. You know, I mean, I don't think anybody is really overly excited but, you know, what Trump doing at he did at Carrier, maybe there's something can be done there. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Martin joins us now. I mean Carrier and their statement, did give some indications about incentives from the state, but do we have any real indication about how the president-elect and vice president- elect were able to get Carrier to keep the jobs in the U.S.? SAVIDGE: No, we really don't. And getting to those incentives coming from the state, remember back in February when Carrier announced it was leaving, Mike Pence who was the governor and not yet running then mate to Donald Trump tried very hard to keep Carrier in the state and would have offered very heavy state incentives. So what was different this time around, some say, no, it's got to be more than that. Maybe there were promises made by the Trump administration to reduce some federal regulations or maybe there is this talk of general overhaul of the corporate tax code that would benefit more than just Carrier. The employees, their favorite rendition of this is that, remember, that there's a parent company to Carrier and that parent company United Technologies does a lot of defense contract work, billions of dollars worth of it every year. They believe that maybe the Trump administration insinuated that work could go away if Carrier went to Mexico. Anderson? COOPER: But that's just what workers are telling you. There's no -- we don't know on that. SAVIDGE: Correct. No. That is just their favorite speculation and maybe tomorrow, when the governor and when president-elect will be here, we may finally here. [21:05:02] COOPER: All right. SAVIDGE: Really motivated this deal. COOPER: Martin Savidge thanks. A lot to talk about, back now with the panel. Karine, do you give Donald Trump and Mike Pence credit? KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, CLINTON SUPPORTER: Yeah, look, if I would love to hear more of how this came to be but this it -- yeah absolutely, saving thousand job especially this time of year when holidays can be really tough for families, I think that's great. I do believe that this is just to -- he can't just do this one company at a time. He has to really -- if he wants to be serious about it, he has to figure out how to do this more broadly. A lot of that is, you know, trying to figure out how do you stop out sourcing, how do you save workers' jobs. And I know there's a bill that Sanders is proposing it's called, I think Outsourcing Prevention Act. That would be a great thing to see Donald Trump say, hey, I support something like that. So I think it's just a temporary answer and I think he needs to really work on it more broadly. KIRSTEN POWERS, USA TODAY COLUMNIST: Yeah I think -- and so I've already give him credit for this, I think this was great. But the reality is, most of the manufacturing jobs are not being lost in and because of trade. They're being lost because of automation about 85 percent of them are actually lost because of automation. So he needs to really have a plan to deal with that because that's the big problem. And instead, trade has kind of become the boogieman and everybody is trying to blame it on that. But that's not really what the problem is unlike Karine is saying, he can't do this company by company. This would -- this was this wouldn't work. COOPER: I think, Peter, you know, what Trump supporters are saying and, you know, the Carrier kind of intimated it is tax incentives, not just, you know, incentives in the state but a general climb in the U.S. that's more pro business. PETER BEINART, CONTRIBUTOR THE ATLANTIC: Right. But let's be clear, this is I mean this is also what was called corporate welfare, right. I mean, you're basically paying these companies essentially to keep the jobs here out of taxpayer money. And it creates a kind of a moral hazard, right. Why -- what's to stop the next U.S. company from staying, you know, great, I'm going to threaten to go to Mexico and get the same sweetheart deal that Carrier did. I think that's the danger here. ALICE STEWART, TRUMP SUPPORTER: Yeah, and what I think Anderson -- I think having worked in a governor's office before, there's a great deal governors can do in states and economic developments in each states can do to help attract business and to keep businesses there. Clearly, this was a case where they were able to keep things in Indiana and it needed help from an outside negotiator which in this case ended up being Donald Trump. And I think maybe there needs to be a partnership between state and federal to make this happen. But to avoid what Peter's referring to, I think tomorrow they're roll out the details of this. This could be a consistent policy across the board so there's no inferences of picking winners and losers here and making sure that they show that, whether it's a stick with going overseas and giving them a horse taxes to bring that goods back or it's a carrot by providing that send of to keep them here. I think that's the key and it's a great success and it's good to be able to show that his policies are working and this is a clear example for that. ALEX BURNS, NATIONAL POLITICAL REPORTER, NEW YORK TIMES: Well, and this is I mean what Alice is alluding to right, is that we've seen competition between states forever to give these kinds of handouts to companies. So, you know, please locate your plant here in Tennessee as opposed to and, you know, across the border in Ohio because of our labor laws or a minimum wage laws. Traditionally, the view and, you know, the last -- I mean, has for presidency as far back as we can recalls, look, as a country, we just can't compete with, you know, Mexico or Vietnam for labor conditions and a lax regulation on the private sector. And if Trump now is everybody is been saying here right to Trump really does want to make it his chief priority to keep jobs in the U.S. and avoid them going overseas because of trade not even -- and before even if address the issue of automation. You do need some kind of blanket policy. And we've not really heard that from him yet and as with basically everything that he talked about during the campaign, he has set an exceptionally high bar for himself in terms of what his voters are going to expect him to be doing. COOPER: And if results in higher prices for consumers, then how will, you know, consumers react to that? KAYLEIGH MCENANY, TRUMP SUPPORTER: Well, and I think he does have a blanket policy. Namely, that Martin pointed out the fact that they were offered incentives before. They still pledged to move these jobs to Mexico. Well what's different now, what's different now is you have a president who says I'm going to lower what is the highest corporate tax rate really in the free world, I'm going to make the maximum tax rate a business pays 15 percent. That provide a lot of encouragement for this companies to keep jobs here because they see they'll be keeping more of their revenue in their buckets. That is a broad policy. And I also think the carrot and sticks point, there are going to be some sticks. There might be some taxes on import, you might see if you build a car in Mexico, you're going to pay a heavy price for, that's the mixed of this ... STEWART: Right. MCENANY: ... but there -- to say there's no broad policy. BURNS: If this was, purely a function or broad policy related to taxes in regulation, why aren't we seeing dozens of companies suddenly ask ... MCENANY: I think he will. Look his 50 days from being ... BURNS: I guess we'll find out. MCENANY: ... his 50 days from being president of the United States and they've really good start that he's already creating a thousand new jobs here and ... BURNS: No, and I mean saving jobs and that's not -- I'm not taking anything away from him. But the point is this is a sort of gubernatorial-level policy that he's executing here with Carrier and to do that on a national level it's extraordinary difficult. [21:10:01] COOPER: Do you think the, I mean, the issues of, you know, some of the folks from the financial sector who he has been appointing -- I mean, from those who voted for him, do you think that matters for those, you know who wanted training this swamp ... POWERS: No -- I've, yeah, well I think first of all he has a lot good well from the people who voted for him. COOPER: Sure. POWERS: But I think he's -- yeah, it's a little bit of leeway and it's true that people don't like Wall Street but tough distinguish between -- there was an article in the Harvard Business review about it was called what people don't get about the working class and they are really talking about the white working class. And if the fact of they really they admire the rich, especially the superrich in a very successful, like Donald Trump. And who they really resent our professionals, so lawyers, doctors, journalists, you know, teachers, people who they feel are sort of looking down on them. And so I do think when they look at some of these people they see highly successful people like Donald Trump who have made it. And so the question is, how does that balance out with the fact that they don't like Wall Street and I think that remains to be seen. COOPER: Did you -- do you -- I mean, do you think it matters? BEINART: Look, I don't think the issue is not just whether some working Wall Street. Is Elizabeth Warren thing to what are the policies? So the tax policy, for instance, right the independent analyst, not just liberals but our center-right as well have said that, that you're going to get at 1 percent reduction in taxes for middle class people and a 10 or 15 percent reduction for rich people. So think more ordinary Americans are not going to see on a benefit from that. Doesn't so much matter that if the person is doing it from Wall Street of that department. They're simply not going to benefit from those kind of tax policies. COOPER: It's so fascinated that tomorrow that we're going to see Alex, you know, the president-elect and the vice president-elect going out on basically a victory tour. They're calling it a victory tour. I mean, I don't think we've ever seen that before. BURNS: They're calling it thank you tour. (CROSSTALK) BURNS: No, I mean this is part of, you know, you heard almost immediately after the election, even before the election for folks in the Trump camp tour optimistic, this sense that he likes getting out there, he's going to want to keep doing this, you're going to have to let him do it. There are people talking about doing it that week. They've obviously waited a ways. But, you know, look its pretty normal, actually, for a president, once he takes office, to get out and around the country and make policy announcements, do your sort of factory tour level stuff. This part is unusual to sit -- have somebody out there even before the take off. There's easy a little deference to the sitting president to say, you know, I'm not in the job yet. COOPER: But I mean, it does say a lot about Donald Trump and what he whether its what he needs or what he likes that getting out there, mixing it up whether it's on Twitter or in person. I mean I think going out on the campaign trail, I think he saw how much he liked that experience. STEWART: I think really in us to thank you to. I think it's a great gesture to show appreciation for his supporters and those who really worked hard to -- and voted for him. But also there have been some in his campaign that have said, yes, he does like the rallies, he does likes interaction with people, he does like to get the feedback from them. So this is, you know, maybe it's a reward for him for all this hard work. MCENANY: But it's also... STEWART: I think it's a well gesture. MCENANY: Yeah, exactly and he's taking this message directly to the American people. And he's always been about getting his message out there without filters and he does that via Twitter and via rallies and I think that's a really good thing. COOPER: All right, a lot more to discuss over the rest to of the hour. Donald Trump is now vowing to cut ties with his business empire, I should say the business operations to avoid the perception of conflicts to the interest. One of the potential problems is new Washington, D.C., hotel, when e's obviously very proud of. Well some critics are now raising questions about the hotel coming up. Also tonight, a "360" exclusive, Senator Elizabeth Warren blasting the Trump transition, plus, her take on the election results and more. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:17:06] COOPER: Today, president-elect Trump vowed to cut his ties with his business empire with the orbit -- the running of it on Twitter he wrote, quote "I will be holding a major news conference in New York City with my children on December 15th to discuss the fact that I'll be leaving my great business in total in order to fully focus on running the country in order to make America great again. While I'm not mandated to do this under law, I feel it's visually important as president, to a no way have a conflict of interest with my various businesses. Hence, legal documents are being crafted which take me completely out of business operations. The presidency is a far more important task." Where on to stay still, many are asking -- oh that's actually that within the tweets. But many though are still asking about, exactly how Donald Trump will go about this with his newest business venture and for instance, just down the street from the White House. Randi Kaye, tonight reports. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) RANDI KAYE, CNN CORRESPONDENT: The Trump International Hotel in the heart of Washington, D.C., luxury at its best, so its no surprise that the kingdom of Bahrain chose the hotel to celebrate its king in the launching next month. Trouble is the hotel is owned by president- elect Donald Trump. And the United States constitution banned officials from accepting payments from foreign powers without congressional approval. RICHARD PAINTER, CHIEF ETHICS LAWYER FOR PRES. GEORGE W. BUSH: The government of Bahrain is going to be paying for this event at the Trump Hotel. This particular transaction could very well be in violation. KAYE: It's all spelled out in Article I, Section XI, known is the Foreign Emoluments Clause. The clause is designed to prevent the U.S. government official from profiting from his officer employment. It bars the president and others from accepting anything from any king, prince or foreign state. DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT-ELECT OF UNITED STATES: This is the most coveted piece of real estate in Washington, D.C., the best location. KAYE: Now Trump's D.C. hotel house in the historic post office pavilion is ratcheting up the conversation about Trump's business affairs and whether they will present a conflict of interest once, he's sworn in. PAINTER: He needs to sell the assets, get the cash, a lot of couple billion dollars, which is a nice start in life for him and his kids and then he can become president of the United States. KAYE: Another potential problem with this hotel is that Donald Trump is leasing the property from the federal government. So when he becomes president, he could end up being both landlord and tenant. That's tricky because federal contracting laws actually prohibit awarding a government contract to a federal employee. The government services administration or GSA leased the federal property to the Trump organization for 60 years for $180 million. That lease also states that no elected official of the government of the United States shall be admitted to any share or part of this lease or to any benefit that may arise there from. TRUMP: This was a GSA and that was one of the most heavily bid projects ever in the history of GSA. KAYE: The GSA may have to breach the contract making it liable for tends of million in monetary damages to the president. President Trump or his family could also end up sewing the GSA, which the president oversees if lease is violated. [21:20:08] PAINTER: He already has another place on Pennsylvania have to they ought to be all looking after for the next four years and that hotel ought to belong to someone else. KAYE: A Trump spokeswoman told us that a top priority is the immediate transfer of management of the Trump Organization and its portfolio of businesses to Donald Jr., Ivanka, and Eric Trump, without offering specifics, the spokesman said Trump will comply with all applicable rules and regulations. (END VIDEO CLIP) KAYE: And the former White House ethics lawyer that I spoke with today for that story Anderson had a couple of scenarios that he suggested. He said that Donald needs to get rid of his businesses. Don't sell it to his children, don't give it to his children, get it out of the family. He also suggested that Congress has some type of resolution and directly at Donald Trump insisting that he suggest (ph), that he get rid of his business and if he refuses to do so, that he has to provide proof that he's not violating any of the clauses in that constitution. So certainly a lot to be worked out Anderson before an operation, back to you. COOPER: Randi, thanks very much. A lot to discuss. Joining me is CNN chief political analyst, Gloria Borger, and back with us our political analyst, Alex Burns, and national political reporter for "The New York Times", and Kirsten Powers, the "USA Today" columnist. Gloria, Bahrain hosting the event at Trump's Hotel, I mean regardless of whether or not they have any ulterior motive here, this is the kind of thing that certainly could raise questions going forward. GLORIA BORGER, CNN CHIEF POLITICAL ANALYST: Sure, because it looks like a country, not just a person but a country is actually trying to curry favor with the president-elect to the United States and, as Randi Kaye points out in her piece, this is actually a constitutional issue once he becomes president. It's illegal to do that. And one other thing I ought to point out here, is that it wasn't that long ago when Donald Trump was complaining that Hillary Clinton was mixing personal gain with policy over at the State Department and the Clinton Foundation. So he understands very well that this could be a big problem for him. He made it into a big problem for Hillary Clinton it became one of his major talking points. COOPER: Alex, I mean President-elect Trump saying look he's going to take himself out of business operations, he's going to have a press conference with more details on this later but that's not ownership and ownership is important. BURNS: Ownership is really the whole ball game if Hillary Clinton wasn't involved in the operations of the Clinton Foundation when she was Secretary of State, but the web of financial connections raised some really serious questions that were major campaign issues. If you have a president of the United States, then I don't think anybody expects Donald Trump as president to be, you know, involved in little ribbon cuttings at new hotels around the world or imagine the operations of the Trump Hotel in Washington. But when you have day to day a president making policy that involves countries, other spending money in his businesses that is a much, much more complicated preposition. COOPER: And then of course, the others it was his children, if they're running the company, are they also advising him? BURNS: Right? And he is then pretty open that his children are going to have a role, flexibles, sort of undefined role. And his administration that we've seen, Ivanka Trump seat on meeting with world leaders and a potential administration of point is already. COOPER: But, you know, just a point Alex -- Kristen, in the sense, this was already baked in to the election. I mean, Donald Trump talked about this before he won the election. Voters had a chance to assess whether or not they cared enough to not allow him to be the president. He said, you know, that he was going to figure out something to do. He didn't talk about, you know, selling all of his businesses. Voters made their choice. POWERS: Well, I mean -- I don't know about that. I mean, I think that there was maybe it's an expectation that he would possibly put things into a blind trust or try to figure out some way to distance himself, and I don't think having the children run the business is really distancing himself considering how close he is to his children. And how, you know, it's not like they talk every now and then they talk all the time and there in official positions on transition team. And so let's just imagine Chelsea Clinton, is on Hillary's transition team let's just stop right there because there would be hysteria, right. I mean, if Chelsea Clinton was working on the transitions team. And then out of the ... COOPER: Sitting in a meeting with ... POWERS: Yes, and sitting in a meeting, I'm sitting and on phone calls with leaders, right. And so you can then pretty quickly see where the problem is. And so the idea that Donald Trump thinks that this is OK, or actually, to be fair, we don't really know what he's going to do. So, we have to wait and see what he's going to do. But I think that anything less than putting it in a blind trust, which the "Wall Street Journal" has said what he needs to do is not really going to be enough. COOPER: Does he seem to understand the scope of the potential conflicts of the problems because he seems to have moved somewhat, you know, into this position that he's in now, but taking himself out of the business operations. BORGER: Well, I think he does understand it more and more every single day as he kind of comes to grips with what the coming president means. And I think he's beginning to understand that every foreign policy move he would make, every question about, say, gee, how did you reform the tax code and how does that benefit real estate? What's your policy on interest rates? How does that benefit real estate? [21:25:12] I think he's beginning to get the sense of that and I have no idea whether they regret the fact that his daughter was sitting in on these meetings but I know for a fact that people raised it and said, gee, maybe -- maybe you shouldn't do that. So I think he sort of coming to terms with this. I mean, a lots of people think he go to just liquidate and sell off it's interest in the company to his kids. And some people are suggesting there's another way to get around this which is to actually appoint a mediator, somebody who would stand between you and your children and kind of make sure that every decision was ethically sound and that the president of the United State was not involved. You know, that might be a solution. But I think he's getting it. COOPER: The other issue though is, I mean, it sort of raises questions again about his tax returns, because there's a lot -- that's not known really about the sort of the international dealings of his business and whether, I mean, I'm wondering if he says down the road. Well, look, I've taken myself out of the business operations or whatever it is, whatever, you know, situation he sets up, therefore, I don't really need to release my tax returns because it's done. I'm out of it. POWERS: I mean, he could, but the problem is this, is this similar to the foundation and it gives other people ways to try to curry favor. Right? So that was the problem with the foundation. It was like, why are they giving money to the foundation? Are they giving it because they want to do good work, or they doing it because they want access to the secretary of state? So that's the problem with these businesses even if the children are still running them. The question is, when people are dealing with the Trump organization, are they doing it to try to curry favor to the president of the United States? So this -- so we have these problems coming from every possible direction. COOPER: Alex? BURNS: And as complicated as all of this is now and as many are his trip wires as there are for Donald Trump right now. You know, talk to folks on Washington who deal with ethic issues sort of investigated ethic issues in the past. They see, you know, once he's actually making foreign policy decisions related to the military, the economy, trade, it's just almost impossible to imagine that you're not going to have at least the appearance that he is being nice to people who have done nice things to his company and we know from the campaign, Anderson, if you remember, to how many speeches did he have this sort of encyclopedic memory of who has been nice to him in the past. Do his on business within the past, who he saw at that great event, you know, at this point and in the past. COOPER: It sound charter (ph) water, but it gets me fascinating, Alex Burns, Kirsten Powers, Gloria Borger, thanks. POWERS: Sure. COOPER: Just ahead tonight, my exclusive interview with Senator Elizabeth Warren about the Trump transition which she thinks Americans were expecting from the president-elect. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:31:34] COOPER: As we've said, the Trump transition team announced two more cabinet picks today, former Wall Street of banker Steven Mnuchin for treasury secretary and billionaire investor Wilbur Ross to head the Commerce Department. Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren has said obviously lots to say about the Trump transition. We have the cabinet shaping up. I spoke to her earlier. Here's some of our exclusive interview. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Is there a chance for common ground between you and other Democrats in a Trump administration? I mean, things like infrastructure spending, opposition to TPP support for reviving Glass- Steagall which is in a law separating commercial investment banking. I mean, would you work for Donald Trump on these and any other issues? SEN. ELIZABETH WARREN, (D) MASSACHUSETTS: Look, I think the real question is how does Donald Trump want to run his administration? If he wants to run his administration on bigotry and on Wall Street insiders trickle down economic that helps a handful of people of the top and leaves everybody else behind, I can't be part of them and I don't think that's where Democrats are. COOPER: So, even if there's more infrastructure spending, which is something you support in general, if it's not done in the way, you know, if it's done through -- it's lowering taxes or corporate taxes. WARREN: If it's -- he trying to help, if it's done to try to help those at the top and it's not actually going to provide jobs and economic growth and opportunity for the rest of America, you know, you can't just put a slap and name on something and say, "Gee, would you automatically sign up for this?: What is really about are those core principles. You know, we believe in dignity for everyone. That's what it is about. That's where you start. That's the stuff you don't negotiate over. And the rest of it, we really believe in building economic opportunity. We now have an economy that is working great. It's working great for those right at the top and everybody else in this economy is being left behind. Isn't just about the poor. This is about working families, this is about middle class families, this is about upper middle class families. This is about people who worry that they can't afford to educate their children. This is about people who worry that they can't afford to retire. This is about people who see no economic future for themselves and others like themselves. We have to do better than that as a country. We once build an America that worked not just for those at the top. It worked across a full range. We weren't perfect, but we were bending it in the right direction. And for 30 years now we have done trickle down economics and it has been an ugly mix of deregulation and just writing one law after another that helps those at the top. Tax cuts for the big guys, no spending for anybody else. We have to reverse that. COOPER: When you look at that electoral map, here's my final question, when you look at that electoral map, I mean there's blue on both coasts, basically, and there's a lot of red in the entire rest of the country. Do you feel like you're out of touch? Because tshat's what the Republicans say about you, that you're out of touch. WARREN: Out of touch when 2.3 million more people voted for the Democratic candidate than the Republican candidate? When the Democrats picked up seats in the Senate and the Republicans lost. When the Democrats picked up seats in the House of Representatives and the Republicans lost. You know, let's be clear, we are not the minority here. We are the party of opposition. [21:35:00] COOPER: But it sounds like you're saying you won but you didn't. So what went wrong? WARREN: Well, look, what I'm saying is that more Americans agreed on with the Democratic candidate for president than agreed with the Republican for president. And not by a little bit, she won by a substantial margin indeed as the numbers keep coming in, that margin continues to grow. COOPER: But your saying that an economic message that is not resonating with voters in Rust Belt States. Even that term Rust Belt is offensive in those states where people hurting, your message is not resonating. WARREN: And that's what I was -- that's what I was just talking about. We're talking about an economy that for more than 30 years has been effectively a trickle-down economy. This economy has been full of deregulation so Wall Street could do better and what's happening, Donald Trump turning around and appointing the ultimate Wall Street insider, I think he's called Mr. Wall Street, to come in and have the keys to the treasury. We need an economy that works across the range that produces good jobs, produces a future. COOPER: But it sounds like you're telling those workers ... WARREN: ... produces opportunity all across the range. COOPER: Sorry to interrupt. It sounds like you're telling those workers who are out of jobs who voted for Donald Trump in Ohio and other places that they just were mistaken, that they were sold a bill of goods that they -- or they just don't understand what's in their best interests. WARREN: Well, I'm sorry, Anderson. I mean, did you just hear what we said about Donald Trump? He promised that he was going to run this government for the American people and not for Wall Street, what he's just done is he's just put a Wall Streeter in charge of the treasury and not just a random one, a guy who actually helped package all of those toxic mortgages, a guy who bought a bank, that made its fortune by squeezing people hard on foreclosure. That's the person who is going to be the chief economic officer of United States. I mean, Donald Trump said one who said one thing during the campaign and now has reversed that by 180 degrees by what he is actually doing. COOPER: Senator Elizabeth Warren, I appreciate your time. Thank you. WARREN: You bet. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Well coming up, these are widely believed to be the final four candidates close to becoming Secretary of State, Mitt Romney, Rudy Giuliani, Retired General David Petraeus and Senator Bob Corker. Still a guessing game at this point but we'll look into it, next. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:41:21] COOPER: The field of potential Secretary of State candidates has narrows to four. Fareed Zakaria has a moment -- first Sunlen Serfaty joins me now with the latest. So, let's talk about the four contenders, what do we know? SUNLEN SERFATY, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Anderson, really interesting today's transition officials for the first time really putting a name to two of the finalists as you said, four they said and no surprise here naming Mitt Romney and Rudy Giuliani as the top two contenders. Of course, the question, who are the other two? We know according to transition sources Tennessee Senator Bob Corker and also General David Petraeus also on that list, and certainly a lot of drama still including this high-profile cabinet position. A very public round of auditions and interviews going on, transition officials tell us so, not to expect any cabinet announcements this week, so it seems that is very public round of auditioning will continue for a at least a short time longer. COOPER: Did they go into any details about what the president-elect's requirements are for a candidate? SERFATY: Yes, this is really interesting, transition officials today really talked about what's on Donald Trump's mind right now as he considers filling out this top post, clearly taking this decision very seriously, outlining three requirements that's really top on his mind right now. He wants to choose someone, according to transition officials, who shares his world view, who Trump namely thinks would do a good job representing the United States abroad and this was interesting, someone who has good chemistry with Donald Trump and that really struck my ear a little bit because that was the same exact language that they used coming out of that meeting last night with Mitt Romney here in New York. They said that Mitt Romney and Donald Trump shared good chemistry at that dinner last night. COOPER: All right. It also seems though, by most accounts, that whatever happens, whoever chooses the dinner between Romney and Trump night was at least, according to them, a positive experience. SERFATY: Absolutely. By all accounts it does seem like they went a long way in burying the hatchet. They seeing their second formal meeting since Donald Trump was chosen as president that he had a two- hour meeting last night. We know that after that meeting, you know, we really saw Mitt Romney lavish praise on Donald Trump and really commend his transition, the job he's doing and really giving him credit saying, look, he did something that I could never win. He won a general election, so certainly trying to smooth things over as he tries out for this job. COOPER: All right, Sunlen Serfaty, Sunlen thanks. Joining me now with more in the options, Donald Trump considering for Secretary of State, CNN World Affairs Analyst, Fareed Zakaria, host of CNN "Fareed Zakaria GPS". You know, most people that Donald Trump is looking at for Secretary of State have a breath of experience, I mean they're all accomplished people. It's interesting on Mitt Romney, given what Mitt Romney had not only said about Donald Trump during the election but also even when he was running for president about Russia that Donald Trump would be considering him in such a public way. FAREED ZAKARIA, CNN HOST FAREED ZAKARIA GPS: So I think there are two possible interpretations, one which I have to confess is the dominant one, is that this is a very slow, public humiliation of Mitt Romney. COOPER: Really? ZAKARIA: Romney has now twice been required to publicly general reflect in front of Trump but if you look at every other appointment Trump has made, they have been hard core loyalists who have been with him from the start. COOPER: And loyalty is something very important to Donald Trump. ZAKARIA: Really, he prizes it. The alternative explanation, which I hope might be true is that this is a way of reaching out to the establishment and unifying the Republican Party because, in a sense, Mitt Romney was the leader of the Never Trump. And so by bringing him on board, it would be kind of -- the ultimate act of unifying the party. You know, we'll see which one it is. COOPER: You know, I mean, among the people on the short list, you know, David Petraeus has been over to see Donald Trump, Bob Corker, obviously Rudy Giuliani. We talked about Mitt Romney. Who do you think has the most foreign policy experience? [21:45:07] ZAKARIA: Oh, there's no question, David Petraeus is in the league of his own. David Petraeus is miles ahead of all these people and I don't mean that with any disrespect to the other people but Petraeus is one of the most accomplished generals in American history. What he did on the battlefield in Iraq and I've watched a little bit, you know, visited with him, he's a remarkable leader. He is remarkably strategic. He has deep knowledge and connections, not just in the Middle East. If you look at the work he's done after that, he is really a very profound understanding of the interdependent economics of North America, US/Mexico and US/Canada which is actually going to be will prove to be a fascinating subject for him were he to have to be part of renegotiating NAFTA. So I think Petraeus is really would be an extraordinary choice. I certainly of all those names, I think he would be by far the most competent, talented person to do it. But they are all good people. COOPER: There's a fascinating readout of a phone call that was released from -- between President-elect Trump and the Pakistan Prime Minister. And it reads -- it's very detailed readout of, according to the Pakistanis, what Donald Trump said, you know, that he was very complementary of the Prime Minister of Pakistan saying he's doing a fantastic job, that Pakistanis are one of the most intelligent people that he looks forward to, you know, to working with them. Were you surprised that, A, they released this in detail and the things that were talked about? ZAKARIA: I'm surprised at how accurate it sounds. It sounds, you know, people should read the transcript because it does sound so much like Donald Trump. COOPER: I mean, he said that, you know, feel free to call me any time even before January 20th, he would love to come to a fantastic country, fantastic place of fantastic people. ZAKARIA: Now, here's the part that I think maybe people have forgotten. This fantastic country full of fantastic people whom Donald Trump thinks are just fantastic would under any version of Trump's Muslim ban not be allowed to come to the United State. (OFF-MIC) ZAKARIA: Well, because it's countries that export terrorism, Muslim countries, countries of concern and any defamation, Pakistan would be part of the probably ... COOPER: Top of the list. ZAKARIA: Very much top of the list. It will also come as a great surprise I think to people in India because Trump has been talking about what a great place India is and how the Indians are wonderful and how he loves Hindus and of course India and Pakistan have these deep tensions. So look I think the nice way you could put it, he was being diplomatic President Sharif of course does not have much power in Pakistan, Pakistan foreign policy in particular is pretty tightly under the control of the military. But I think it gives us a sense of, you know, Trump is a good salesman. He makes people feel at home. COOPER: Yeah, it gives you a sense of how he makes deals. ZAKARIA: Yeah. COOPER: It's really interesting to read. ZAKARIA: Everyone is fantastic. COOPER: Yeah, well. ZAKARIA: And you, Anderson, are fantastic. COOPER: I don't think so, not right now but, you know, the rainbow comes and goes. Fareed Zakaria, thanks very much. ZAKARIA: My pleasure. COOPER: Up next, the police killing of Keith Lamont Scott set off mass of protests in Charlotte just two months ago. You may remember, well today, the DA announced that the police officer will face no charges. The latest from Charlotte, next. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:52:02] COOPER: The police officer who fatally shot a man in North Carolina two months ago setting off massive protest will not face any charges. That is the word today from the district attorney who said that the killing of Keith Lamont Scott was justified. Now, we haven't seen wide spread protesting tonight, although, there was a scuffle between police and a handful of protesters a short time ago. Ryan Young has more tonight from Charlotte. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: He has no weapon. He has no weapon. RYAN YOUNG, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: From the moment video surfaced in late September, police, Keith Lamont Scott's family and community members. All offers bearing accounts of the events that led up to the deadly encounter. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: He doesn't have a gun. He has a TBI. He's not going to do anything to you guys. He just took his medicine. YOUNG: The video shows a tense standoff in which Scott's wife, Rakeyia can be heard shouting at police that her husband has a TBI or Traumatic Brain Injury that he suffered from a near death motor cycle crushed last year that left him disabled. Police maintain they were looking for someone else with an outstanding warrant at the apartment complex September 20th when they noticed Scott sitting in his SUV. The video shows Scott exiting his vehicle and ignoring officers' commands to drop his weapon. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: The police just shot my daddy both times for being black. YOUNG: In a Facebook live video that circulated widely after the shooting, Scott's daughter, Lyric Scott, who said she did not see the shooting, said her father was reading a book when he was shot and accused police of targeting him because of his race and of planting evidence. Wednesday, the district attorney pointed at this photo. Investigators believe shows the gun poking from Scott's ankle at a gas station before the shooting. Murray also told reporters, DNA was found on the grip of the weapon found at the scene. ANDREW MURRAY, MECKLENBURG COUNTRY DISTRICT ATTORNEY: Mr. Scott's gun, a colt 380 semiautomatic was recovered at the scene. It had one round in the chamber, the safety was off and the gun was cocked. YOUNG: The officer who fired the fatal shot, Brentley Vinson is also black, but that did little to calm the furry as days of heated protest erupted in downtown, Charlotte. After the DA's announcement, Scott's family vowed not to stop fighting. CHARLES MONNETT, SCOTT FAMILY ATTORNYER: We still have real questions about the decisions that were made that day in terms of how they confronted Keith, how they reacted to the information that he had a brain injury and whether they used appropriate de-escalation techniques to end this situation in a way that didn't result in the loss of Keith Scott's life. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Into this decision? YOUNG: Well, Anderson, we want to let you know, some of the scuffles that happened here today was over that flag right there. Some of the protesters actually tried to take it down. Police officers stopped that. And recently, the protesters started walking again. They started pushing up against the police officers or on bicycles trying to push them back. And at this point they started working toward the intersection again. [21:55:10] We've seen police here a lot more aggressive today, making sure people stayed out of the streets. Right now, they're corralling them in this little area making sure that traffic still flows. So, the interesting night we know about four arrests so far, but this group now are down to about 25 to 30 people. COOPER: All right. Ryan Young. Ryan, appreciate it. Thanks very much. We'll be right back to pay tribute to someone that we lost, the creator, one of my all-time favorite things. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: Before we go, a quick with fund farewell to a man who's named and impact on countless lives. Mine included, probably, maybe even billions of lives, billions of serve. You've probably don't know the name, Jim Delligatti but believe me you know his works. He invented one of my all time favorite creations, the "Big Mac". He invented it in 1967. It's the number one meal, in case you're not familiar with McDonald's. You don't have to say Big Mac anymore, you can just say the number one meal and you get the Big Mac and you get the fries and you get a coke or whatever soda you'd like. Jim Delligatti was 98 years old. And we're very sad to hear today of his passing. And I'm going to have a Big Mac tonight in his honor. That does it for us. Thanks very much for watching. "CNN TONIGHT" with Don Lemon starts now. [22:00:04] DON LEMON, CNN HOST: Donald Trump asked to his billionaires club aka, cabinet. Trump, Romney & Priebus Having Dinner in NYC; Trump Suggests Loss of Citizenship or Jail for Flag-Burners; Trump Targets CNN Reporter; Tracing Trump's False Claim On Illegal Voters; Carrier, Trump Team Reach Deal To Keep About 1,000 Jobs In Indiana; Officials: Tennessee Wildfires "Human-Caused". Aired 8-9p ET Aired November 29, 2016 - 20:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [20:00:06] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening. Thanks for joining us. There's a lot happening tonight on several fronts. We'll have the latest on devastating fires burning in Tennessee. Plus, new controversy over something President-elect Trump tweeted just this morning. We begin thought with just the dinner date that no one would have predicted. Right now, at a New York restaurant, not far from here, in fact, President-elect Trump is having dinner with Mitt Romney. The same Mitt Romney who did his best to derail Trump's bid for the presidency is now a contender for the cabinet position of secretary of state. It is their second meeting. Reince Priebus, Trump's incoming chief of staff, is dining with them. Our Jim Acosta booked a table in the restaurant and joins us now by phone. What's the scene there like, Jim? JIM ACOSTA, CNN SENIOR WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT (via telephone): Anderson, we can see right now, the president-elect sitting at the table with Mitt Romney who I suppose he's interviewed the secretary of state right now, along with the outgoing RNC chair Reince Priebus, who is going to be become the White House chief of staff. It's been a pretty warm and friendly discussion, pretty engaging discussion for the last 20 minutes or so since they arrived at this restaurant, inside the Trump International Hotel, right here in Columbus Circle and just across here at CNN. And from what we can tell so far, you know, Trump sort of started out the conversation, talked for a good five minutes or so, and then Mitt Romney chimed right in. Right now, I can tell you both men are very animated, but smiling. It is warm. There is obviously no animosity whatsoever that is leftover from what we heard during the primaries when Mitt Romney referred to Donald Trump as a phony and a fraud. And Donald Trump talked about Mitt Romney choking like a dog in the 2012 presidential election. We're seeing none of that venom on display here at this table. The person you see who's doing the most lifting right now, Anderson, is Reince Priebus. He's having trouble getting a word in edge wise. But pretty elaborate set-up in terms of getting the dinner started. Sat down roughly about an hour before these two arrived. Secret Service swept the room. They swept each individual customer at every enable this room to make sure there wasn't any trouble with. Then the two men walked right no in with Reince Priebus, just the before 8:00. As they were talking here, we could tell you that they're not even on their first course. So, they're having a discussion right now. And from all appearances, Anderson, this is a very positive meeting between the president-elect and Mitt Romney. COOPER: Are you part of a press pool? Did you just happen to be in this restaurant? ACOSTA: I didn't quite make out the question but -- COOPER: How'd you get in the restaurant? Like, what are you doing there? Did you know they were going to meet there? Are you part of a press pool following them? ACOSTA: We had gotten a tip, Anderson, before this dinner that it was possible that they would be here. So, like any enterprising reporter, we decided to go ahead and make a reservation. We had no idea that they would be sitting down in this dining room that is part of the restaurant. As a matter of fact, there's a bar area and a dining area. They did not go to the bar. They went to the dining area. A couple tables from where we are right now, just 15, 20 feet from where we're sitting right now, Anderson. And at one point, Reince Priebus turned around and noticed me, I'll be upfront about that, then went right back to the discussion. They don't seem to be distracted at all by having a reporter in the room. Some of his key advance, security people are also in the room. They don't seem to be troubled by us being here at all. And we did not disturb them as they came in. They sat down and went right into their discussion. And I can tell you, the most striking thing I that can see right now, Anderson, is there absolutely no sense of any animosity whatsoever between these two men. And they are almost getting along like old friends. At one point I saw Donald Trump sort of tossing his arms far bit while Mitt Romney was talking. Sort of the body language of maybe he's not liking what Mitt Romney had to say, but then they went right back to having this very lively exchange. It was probably the most talked about dinner of the transition. And we're watching it unfold right now. COOPER: I assume CNN is picking up the check for you at this restaurant tonight, because it's pretty enterprising on your part. Was there -- was there a meeting tonight at Trump Tower between the two that preceded this dinner? ACOSTA: In terms of what preceded this dinner, the only thing that we know of between these two men, Anderson, and I'll confess, I'm having a little trouble hearing you, was the meeting at the Bedminster Golf Club a couple of weeks ago. That would appear the last meeting. We were also told by a source that Melania Trump, the future first lady and Ann Romney, the wife of Governor Romney, were going to be at this dinner tonight. They have not joined this at this point right now -- at this point, it's just the three men, the future White House chief of staff, Donald Trump, president-elect, and Mitt Romney potentially the next secretary of state. [20:05:12] COOPER: And the Trump Team, what, if anything, are they saying about this or are they saying about Mitt Romney? ACOSTA: What is the transition saying about Mitt Romney right now? COOPER: Yes. ACOSTA: You're hearing a big split, Anderson. And there are people who inside this transition who will tell you that selecting Mitt Romney as the next secretary of state makes a lot of sense because he will -- that will show the country that Donald Trump is capable of having thick skin, of getting over past grievances and uniting the country. And that is what so tantalizing about making Mitt Romney the secretary of state. Of course, you have people like Kellyanne Conway, Newt Gingrich, and other supporters inside Trump world who just don't like the thought. They're aghast at the thought of Mitt Romney becoming the secretary of state because of the horrible things that were said about him. I can tell you that the press is now coming in to this room, Anderson, it looks like (INAUDIBLE) of all this. You're going to have all of that story (INAUDIBLE) bringing in a small pool of reporters and photographers. So, hopefully, maybe our presence here helped opened things up for this dinner, Anderson. There was grumblings that this might have happened, but it is amazing to see. There was that dinner the other night when the family went out and didn't tell the pool about it. That's not the case tonight. The pool was informed about this, and now there's a small pool of reporters and photographers in here getting some shots of this dinner. COOPER: All right. Jim, we'll continue to check in with you. The dinner meeting taking place right now capped a busy day in the Trump transition. Just a short time ago, we learned that former Wall Street executive and Hollywood producer Steven Mnuchin is expected to be named as Trump's choice for treasury secretary, and billionaire investor Wilbur Ross is expected to be tapped for commerce secretary. Those announcements could come as soon as tomorrow. Earlier today, Team Trump named former Labor Secretary Elaine Chao to head the Transportation Department and Representative Tom Price for Health and Human Services. Let's talk about it now with CNN political commentator and Republican strategist Kevin Madden joins us. Chief political analyst Gloria Borger and CNN political analyst and "USA Today" columnist Kirsten Powers. Kevin, I want to start with you. You obviously have worked very closely with Mitt Romney. What do you make of them reaching out to Mitt Romney? Of the relationship they have based -- and I mean, what they said about each other during the campaign? KEVIN MADDEN, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Well, I think the initial outreach had to do with sending a message I think to a lot of Republicans that Donald Trump was interested in uniting the party and genuinely interested in getting some insights from somebody like Mitt Romney who has spent a lot of time working on national security and foreign policy issues. And I think what that first initial meeting did was show another side of Mitt Romney, the side of Mitt Romney that Donald Trump endorsed during his 2012 campaign. There was an existing relationship there before it frayed during this 2016 cycle. So, I think this particular event what's interesting about this is the nature of it. Burying the hatchet is something you do over dinner. And it is a very personal breaking of bread is something that's very personal, particularly when you have your spouses there. So, I think this is an indication that Reince Priebus is helping broker this burying of the hatchet between the two men. COOPER: But how real is the possibility that he could be named secretary of state? I mean, if there's only been in the last meeting was a while ago and this is now a dinner meeting, that's not necessarily substantive meeting. MADDEN: Yes, I think it's very possible. I think one of the things that I'm interested -- that I found interesting was that as much as there are those inside the Trump world that are in opposition to the idea of Mitt Romney being named secretary of state, nobody is declaring that it absolutely won't happen. And if there were folks inside that world that wanted to make sure that it wasn't going to, that's what they'd be predicting and they would be dismissing the idea outright. And they're not doing that. So, I think it's very much a possibility, but Donald Trump is -- does have a blessing here in the simple fact that he has a number of candidates for the secretary of state position, that are very good, very qualified and have a lot of support amongst people inside, inside the Republican Party. COOPER: And, Gloria, I mean, it's easy to read too much into a dinner. I mean, one side of you look and say, well, he hasn't had dinners with any of the other interviewees. Although obviously, he spent a ton of time with Rudy Giuliani among them. He met with General Petraeus just yesterday. Senator Corker, he's obviously met with as well, and others. But at the same time, it's easy to read too much into something like this. GLORIA BORGER, CNN CHIEF POLITICAL ANALYST: Well, look, I think this is high profile and they know it. And inviting Mitt Romney back for dinner, I was told by a source in the transition, is meaningful. That was the word that my source used. [20:10:01] And I think if you -- if you're looking at this, it is, it is meaningful. These men could not be more different. They've said an awful lot of stuff about each other. I don't expect they're ever going to be best friends. But I think what they're coming to and maybe I'm wrong is some kind of mutual respect. And I think what Trump is going to demand from Mitt Romney is loyalty and trust. And I think if I had to guess that that's kind of backdrop for all of this, given the words that Mitt Romney spoke about Donald Trump, including calling him a con man. And I think that he's trying to, as Donald Trump does with his gut, sort of feel out somebody to see if he's a team player. And one thing I should point out is that sources in the Romney world have kind of gone dark on this. And, Kevin, you know this better than I do, but they're dark. Mitt Romney isn't talking to them. They're not talking a lot to us. And Romney's not lobbying for the job, nor has he asked anybody to lobby on his behalf for the job. So, if he gets it, it's clear to me that he wants this job or he wouldn't be having dinner tonight. If he gets it, great, if he doesn't, back to his life. COOPER: Kirsten, even if he's not the pick, it does help Donald Trump to not only, you know, have a relationship with Mitt Romney, but to be seen to be consulting him. KIRSTEN POWERS, CNN POLITICAL ANALYST: Yes, no, I think -- we don't really know what Donald Trump is up to here. We don't know how serious he is about Romney or if he's just doing this to make it very clear that not only did he win, but now the person who was tearing him down is basically coming and, you know, sort of being a supplicant, as basically like, you know, bending to his will. And that makes Donald Trump -- probably makes him very happy and it makes him look strong. And it very easily could be what he's doing. Or he could be serious. We don't really know. As Gloria said, the Romney people have been incredibly quiet, aren't really saying very much. So, we don't know what Mitt Romney's thinking. I think if he doesn't get it, it'll look pretty bad for him to have gone this far and sort of turned around on everything he said and then basically to just treated like, you know, like Trump's like a cat playing with a toy. COOPER: I mean, Kevin, along those lines, you know, they approached him, and yet you have people from the transition team coming out, you know, throwing shade and attacking Governor Romney. MADDEN: That's right, and they were an unconventional campaign that was very successful and I expect they're going to be an unconventional transition. I hope they're successful, and an unconventional presidency. They air a lot of their differences publicly. And the odd thing about that is I don't really have a whole lot of criticism for that because we've always asked that people in the political world be more genuine, be more transparent about what they say publicly, matching what they say privately. Kellyanne Conway, you know, and others, have been very vocal about that. But they have always finished their statements by saying, but there's only one person who makes the decision, and that person makes the decision is President-elect Trump and if he makes it, they'll support it. So, I think that's been an interesting thing. COOPER: Kirsten, it was interesting, because Monica Langley from "Wall Street Journal" was on the program last night and saying, you know, based on her reporting, that nothing Kellyanne Conway has said publicly was going rogue that it was all done with Donald Trump's knowledge and forethought, and if that is in fact the case, which seems her reporting is very accurate, it's telling and interesting that he would want that message out there. And to Kevin's point, I think it is a valid argument that we always call for transparency, the airing of differences is transparent. POWERS: Yes, I think that's true, but I do think there is an element of is this a very nice way to treat somebody that you're considering for very high post in your administration. And I -- just the public nature of this is very interesting. I mean, the fact that, you know, Jim Acosta got a tip off that he was able to go there and see this. I would expect it would be a private room. It's very clear that Trump wants everyone to see this. (CROSSTALK) POWERS: Sorry. Go ahead, Gloria. BORGER: No, it's a reality show. I mean, he does want all of us to see it and Mitt Romney is a big boy. If he didn't to want go, he didn't have to go. COOPER: But also adds to the drama, it adds to the conversation, and Donald Trump loves that, like that. That is something he -- BORGER: Yes. COOPER: We should also point out just a few moments ago, Gloria, Carrier which is a big air-conditioning manufacturer, sends a tweet and I want to read it. It says, quote, "We are pleased to have reached a deal with President-elect Trump and Vice President-elect Trump to keep thousands of jobs in Indy. More details soon." That decision, you know, they had a decision to move jobs to Mexico. It was a big talking point for Donald Trump on the campaign trail. He was very critical of it. This is obviously something which, you know, they were negotiating and it's a big win for him no matter how you slice it. [20:15:02] BORGER: Sure. And I, you know, we don't know the details of the deal or the conversations, but I would have to guess that what Donald Trump and Mike Pence were talking about is easing regulations, changing up the tax code to make it more beneficial for Carrier to keep it's plant in the United States. And that also that perhaps Donald Trump wouldn't impose heavy tariffs on companies like Carrier in the future who did decide to move some jobs over there. I don't know exactly what was part of it, but I guarantee you, it'll something like this is going to be part of Donald Trump's economic plan, which would be more favorable to business. And then keep, keep companies like Carrier here. It's a big win for Donald Trump. I mean, he promises from the campaign he's not even in office. And he worked to get it done. And the other day, I think he tweeted about it saying we're very close. COOPER: Right. He tweeted on Thanksgiving saying, even though on Thanksgiving, working on this. BORGER: Right. COOPER: You know, their carrots and their sticks, we don't know which was used in this or some combination thereof. BORGER: Exactly. COOPER: Everyone, thank you. Much more ahead, the president-elect thinks people who burn the American flag should lose their citizenship or be thrown in jail. We'll get into the constitutional issues that raises and also the reason why we decided to start tweeting about that this morning. Why is he even doing that in the first place? Is it to distract from other issues? We'll look at that. Also, tonight, a live update from Gatlinburg, Tennessee, where raging wildfires -- look at these images -- that killed at least three people. We'll have the latest on what caused the fires, the fight to contain them, which is ongoing, and the destruction they are causing. (VIDEO CLIP PLAYS) (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: Well, new controversy tonight over something president-elect tweeted. Imagine that. This morning, he wrote, quote, "Nobody should be allowed to burn the American flag. If they do, there must be consequences, perhaps loss of citizenship or year in jail!" We get to the issues of a president-elect proposing, revoking American citizenship or throwing them in jail for constitutional and protected actions in a moment. The first I want to answer the question of why Donald Trump was tweeting about this in the first place? It seems to stem from a small liberal arts college in Massachusetts. [20:20:02] Miguel Marquez tonight joins us. So, can you just explain, first of all, what's been going on Hampshire College since the election? MIGUEL MARQUEZ, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yes. So, this has been a riotous time here. The day after the election, students upset not only about the outcome of the election, but about the rhetoric leading into it and some of the hateful acts that they saw immediately after, were protesting. They lowered the main flag at the campus half-staff. The next night, which happened to be the very early mornings of Veteran's Day, someone pulled that flag down and burned it. There is now an investigation into ongoing as to what happened there. A week later, the board of trustees and they said this in a statement, they wanted to focus the college's efforts on addressing racist, misogynistic, Islamophobic, anti-immigrant, anti-Semitic, and anti- lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer rhetoric and behaviors. This was in response to some of those episodes you saw immediately after the election and some of those incidences of hate across the country -- Anderson. COOPER: And, understandably, there've been counter-protests from veterans, correct? And others. MARQUEZ: Veterans extraordinarily upset that this is happening. Not only veterans here, but people from the town, people from surrounding towns, very big protest here over the weekend. They are promising another protest if this is not wrapped up this coming weekend. The school trying to do everything they can, I think at this point, to get students to the place where they feel they can raise this flag again and keep in mind, it's only one flag. There are several flags around the college. They are flying, but the one main flag in the college is not -- Anderson. COOPER: And have students there had any kind of reaction to Donald Trump's statement this morning? MARQUEZ: This is a very small school and a very small town, and I think that they are blown away by the magnitude of the backlash to all of this. The protest this past Sunday, another one planned. We spoke to one student who is a trustee here at the school, or like in the student government. I guess voting with the trustees on a lot of matters that pertain to the school. Here's what he had to say about the Donald Trump tweeting about this. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) EDUARDO SAMANIEGO, HAMPSHIRE COLLEGE STUDENT: Like today, what Donald Trump has said the president-elect of the United States, that those who burn the flag should be jailed or lose their citizenship. What does that say about our First Amendment? What does that say about freedom of speech? I think those are much more complicated issues and those are much more important than talking about the small college in the middle of Massachusetts that has burned a flag. (END VIDEO CLIP) MARQUEZ: What's interesting about this young man, he is undocumented. He has a full ride scholarship to this college. He came to the United States when he was 16 years old. He grew up the last several years in -- outside of Atlanta, in Georgia. He was not able to go to school there. He was able to go to school here. He was top of his class. He's on the board of trustees. He's a student on the trustees here. And he is undocumented. So, feels very, very passionate and feels that the president-elect is tweeting specifically and threatening specifically him. As for the flag burning, he doesn't think it should have happened. He sees it as a symbol of opportunity for this country and hopes that it will go back up soon, Anderson. COOPER: All right. Miguel Marquez, thanks very much. A lot to talk about now. CNN political commentator and Trump supporter, Alice Stewart is joining us. CNN political commentator and Democratic strategist and pro-Clinton super PAC advisor, Paul Begala. CNN political analyst and "USA Today" columnist Kirsten Powers is back. CNN political commentator and former Reagan White House political director and Trump supporter, Jeffrey Lord. CNN political commentator and Republican consultant, Margaret Hoover. CNN political commentator and former congressional Black Caucus executive director, Angela Rye, and CNN senior legal analyst, Jeffrey Toobin. Good night, everybody. (LAUGHTER) Jeffrey, before we talk about why Donald Trump is tweeting this out, not just about what was happening in New Hampshire, but also maybe the politics behind it or the media strategy behind it. Just the legality of this -- this has been asked and answered by the Supreme Court. The constitutionality of the American flag as distasteful as burning the American flag is. JEFFREY TOOBIN, CNN SENIOR LEGAL ANALYST: Two things actually in that tweet have been settled by the Supreme Court. One is the more famous issue which is in 1989 and 1990, the Supreme Court said there is a constitutionally protected right to burn the American flag. It is protected under the First Amendment. The other thing the Supreme Court has said is that the right to citizenship is a constitutional right. So, a court can't take it away from you. It's like the right for a lawyer when you're charged with a crime. The court can't sentence you to no lawyer in court. So, they can't take away your citizenship. They can put you in jail. They can execute you. They can take away your right to vote. [20:25:00] But there is no such thing as a sentence of taking away your citizenship. COOPER: Jeffrey Lord, as a Trump supporter, does it concern you at all that the president-elect of the United States in a single tweet has gone against two parts of the Constitution, two things that are constitutionally protected as distasteful as they may be? JEFFREY LORD, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Well, first of all, I should say, I do part company with him on this. I'm a strong believer in the First Amendment, which is why I'm with Justice Scalia on Citizens United, the same thing, free speech. Politically speaking, I do think that this probably helps him. There is a lot of -- for obvious reasons, very emotional attachment to the American flag. COOPER: But do you think he understands -- do you think he knows that in a single tweet, he said two things which are -- LORD: I honestly don't know. But I think it's good -- he has -- I mean, he's now president-elect of the United States, and all year, we had people saying, you know, when he does these things, he's not going to get elected. He does them I think for a reason. They stir conversation. They get issues out there. They help people vent in some case. COOPER: Well, I think you raise an interesting point. They stir conversation. Paul Begala, I want to go back to something you said last night and let's talk -- you can talk about it again, it steers conversation and it takes conversation away from other issues, in fact, this takes conversation away from his last tweets which were completely factually -- there is no evidence -- PAUL BEGALA, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: False. COOPER: -- of what have he tweeted about millions of illegal voters voting for Hillary Clinton. Now, the discussion switches to this, which is kind of an age-old obvious issue that's going to galvanize a lot of people. BEGALA: And a very popular position. Jeffrey's right, it's not the law of the land. It's not what the constitution is, but most Americans abhor flag burning. If we could -- LORD: Right. BEGALA: -- we would outlaw it. But we can't because we have freedom in this country. LORD: Right. BEGALA: Right? But I think -- in this case it is just a theory. I think he's trying to distract from the appointments he's making. Today seems to be stocking his cabinet with Washington insiders. Good for him, perfect right to pick his team. Elaine Chao, former cabinet member in the Republican administration of President George W. Bush. COOPER: Married to Mitch McConnell. BEGALA: The wife of the Senate majority leader. But very accomplished woman on her own, fully deserving of at least a full vote. I mean, she seems qualified to me. This -- Dr. Price, Congressman Price from Georgia, long time chairman of the House Budget Committee, long time Washington veteran, apparently now is going to be the choice for Health and Human Services. So, he's going right to the establishment, for picking his cabinet, and this is -- this could annoy his base. So, what's he do? He throws something out for the base. He says, oh, by the way, I'm going to take away your citizenship if you burn the flag. And that's going to help keep the base loyal to him even as he -- he hasn't drained the swamp, he's just bringing in new alligators, not even new ones, bigger alligators. MARGARET HOOVER, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: May I offer an alternative view? COOPER: Sure. HOOVER: Maybe there's no game theory here, right? Maybe this is not a big strategic sort of gotcha. Maybe he was watching a cable news channel that had a segment about Hampshire on this morning and their flag burning, and maybe he tweeted about it three or four minutes afterwards. (CROSSTALK) HOOVER: But that actually happened -- let's be clear, that did happen. That happened. I didn't just create a scenario. That actually happened this morning. And so, what happened was, Donald Trump, as we know, gets on the Twitter, isn't restrained, has gotten his Twitter feedback, clearly, because it's unlikely that any senior advisors would have -- COOPER: There was a FOX News report shortly before he had tweeted out, we don't know if there was a linkage there, but I mean, he certainly watches the shows as we're going to talk about in a little bit. I mean, he was tweeting about this show last night minutes after one of the reports. HOOVER: Because he's at dinner with Mitt Romney. ALICE STEWART, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: One of the things to keep in mind also, he put out a tweet on this and we're talking about this 12 hours later. Whereas he put out several press releases today on key appointments and those aren't getting quite as much attention. With regard to the flag burning issue, it's important to keep in mind, we all -- majority of Americans agree that it's despicable and disrespectful to burn the flag, but what he's proposing, Hillary Clinton did the exact same thing in 2005 with the Flag Burning Act, which would require a year in prison as well as $100,000 fine for people burning the flag. So, what he's proposing is not unusual. And what I think with regard to the key appointments today, why would he want to distract from that? Him appointing Tom Price in that position, singlehandedly would -- the beginning of the end of Obamacare. And -- COOPER: It may not be unusual, but it still doesn't make it constitutionally appropriate. ANGELA RYE, CNN POLITICAL COMMENATOR: That's exactly right. And I think that we have to start talking about this as this is our incoming commander-in-chief. This man should understand constitutional law. It's fine for him to say the Supreme Court ruled in Texas versus Johnson and I don't agree with that. But I think it is curious. It's not what's in that 140 characters. It is the mindset behind what's in the 140 characters on Twitter. [20:30:04] The reason we talk about this, Alice, over and over again is because it actually is legitimately scary to many of us who feel like we -- I know, Anderson, feelings, I'm sorry, but we feel like we potentially elected a dictator. Someone who thinks he does not have to be accountable to constitutional law, he doesn't have to be accountable to the legislative branch. He thinks he could just come in and do some crazy stuff. That's crazy. COOPER: But, Kristine, it is -- I mean, we are in uncharted waters with a president-elect who is continuing to tweet just as he did, maybe a little less but as he did during the campaign. POWERS: Right. COOPER: I mean, when I first heard that he was tweeting about something that was on this broadcast a number of tweets, again, factually incorrect tweets last night, I kept thinking doesn't he have like a briefing book on ISIS to be reading last night at 10:00 or 9:00 of 8:00? POWERS: Yeah. BEGALA: And he is turning away those briefers, you know that. There's been reports that he's not ... COOPER: But, I mean, again, there is a huge amount of information that for him to be absorbing now and thinking about and the fact that he's watching shows. I appreciate he's watching the show. POWERS: Yeah. COOPER: He doesn't have a Nielsen box. It doesn't really help. POWERS: Yeah. COOPER: But what is he doing? POWERS: Yeah, but I -- but that was true during the campaign. I mean, he may ... COOPER: But I get a version of his campaign. POWERS: OK, well, I guess, I would still say even then he should have probably been boning up on what's going on. And so I think it is concerning that he continues to do this. But in terms of the substance of what he said I think the revoking the citizenship part is very concerning. I believe that people should -- I believe in the constitutional right of free speech so I have a problem with banning flag, flag burning. Yes, but I think that what he said, to Alice's point, to be fair to him, Democrats have supported this, that and even though it is constitutionally protected there have been repeated attempts to have constitutional amendments. So if he supports that that's -- I don't support it. I disagree with it. But it's actually not really out of the mainstream. It's the revoking the citizenship that is problem. BEGALA: It's a question of why. And I want to believe that there's a strategy and now you guys are convincing me that there's not. And he's going to have the nuclear codes in a few weeks, guys. COOPER: We're going to have more with our panel. Also this, as we mentioned, another target of the president-elect's tweets and retweets, CNN Senior Washington Jeff Zeleny, for a report he did on the show last night. Trump retweeted multiple attacks on him after he reported on Trump's claim, unfounded claim that millions have voted illegally. That is next. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: If you're following along the president-elect's controversial tweets the latest was a suggestion that people who burn the flag, as we've talking about, should have their citizenship revoked or be thrown in jail. We're talking about that before the break. But just last night there was another target, CNN Senior Washington Correspondent Jeff Zeleny. [20:35:03] This was after Jeff reported on this program last nights, correctly, I should add, that Trump's tweets alleging that millions of people voted illegally had no actual basis in fact. And the president-elect in fact has not offered any evidence. Exactly, six minutes after Jeff's report, Trump retweeted a bunch of attacks including "Jeff Zeleny, just another generic CNN part-time want to be journalist! CNN still doesn't get it. They will never learn!" And the president-elect retweeted this one from a 16-year-old boy in California. "Jeff Zeleny, pathetic, you have no sufficient evidence that Donald Trump did not suffer from voter fraud. Shame!" Then Trump added, "Bad reporter." Jeff Zeleny responded to Trump on Twitter, "Good evening! Have you looked for examples of voter fraud? Please send our way. Full-time journalist here. Still working." That he is. He joins me now. So, did President-elect Trump respond to your tweet, Jeff? JEFF ZELENY, CNN SENIOR WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT: No, Anderson, Mr. Trump did not respond to that tweet but thousands of his followers did. And they believed him when he says that there was a lot of voter fraud, you know, that happened in the election. But, you know, this is not about us. This is about looking for this evidence of widespread voter fraud. And we're talking widespread. He said millions of people voted illegally. If not for them he would have won the popular vote. And it seems to me that's what this is all about here. And through day by day the popular vote, the tally is increasing slightly. Hillary Clinton is up by just over 2 million. And that is agitating, I'm told, by people who have spoken to transition officials and the president elect. And that is one of the things behind this. But I think it gets to a larger point here as well. The context of this is interesting. We've seen a pattern now throughout Mr. Trump's successful campaign. He tries to, you know, sort of demonize and distract. And this is one of the latest things here. But so far, he or his aides have not provided any evidence that millions of people voted illegally. COOPER: Those tweets have also gotten some criticism, I know, from a politically allies of his, right? ZELENY: Oh, they have. In fact, several Republicans we talked to today on Capitol Hill simply didn't want to talk about this at all. The flag-burning thing in particular was something that, you know, no Republican wanted to talk about. But Newt Gingrich has been a die- hard support over Donald Trump. And he did an interview with Susan Page of "USA Today" this evening or this afternoon and he said something I thought that was very interesting. He said, "The president of the United States should not be randomly tweeting without having someone else checking it out. You wonder what else he is doing." So, Gingrich called it his biggest mistake so far in the three weeks since he's been elected. But one other friend I talked to explained it like this. They said it's been 22 days since Donald Trump has had a campaign rally so he misses that applause and enthusiasm that really kept him alive here. So he is getting some of that, at least, electronically here by looking through some of his supporters' messages but of course he'll be going back out on the road on Thursday for a big rally in Cincinnati, that I'm sure will pump him back up. COOPER: Jeff Zeleny, thanks very much. Given that there's no evidence that the claims Trump made on Twitter, no actual facts there, where did he get the idea that millions of people, millions of people voted illegally? Randi Kaye tonight following the digital trail. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) RANDI KAYE, CNN CORRESPONDENT: This appears to be the original source of Donald Trump's so-called evidence for his claim that millions voted illegally. The Twitter feed belongs to Gregg Phillips whose Twitter handle is JumpVote. Back on November 11th Phillips tweeted, "Completed analysis of database of 180 million voter registrations. Number of non-citizen votes exceeds 3 million consulting legal team. Two days later we have verified more than 3 million votes casts by non-citizens." Phillips is the founder of VoteStand, a voter fraud reporting app. I reached out to him on Twitter asking him to provide me the source for his information and any relevant data but he responded, "No." "Why not? When do you plan to share it and how," I asked. His response, "As I've said from the beginning I will release the data, methods, analysis to the public, no media spin." He never said when that information would be released. When I asked Phillips for an interview he sent me this article from cnn.com calling Trump's claim about millions voting illegally false and writing, "CNN seems to have already made the decision." How Gregg Phillips could possibly verify that millions voted illegally just three days after the election is anyone's guess. "The Washington Post" reported Phillips started making these claims even before data on voter history was available in most jurisdictions. None of that has stopped websites like Infowars from picking up on Phillips' tweets. Infowars is the brainchild of radio host Alex Jones who "Rolling Stone" once called the most paranoid man in America. Jones has suggested that the 9/11 attacks and the Boston marathon bombing were inside jobs by the U.S. government. Jones also argued that those involved in the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting were really actors and that nobody was actually hurt. He even claimed the Apollo 11 moon landing was faked. [20:40:29] If Donald Trump based his voter fraud claim on what he read on Infowars, it wouldn't be the first time. When Trump argued that thousands and thousands of Muslims in New Jersey celebrated the 9/11 attack he tweeted a link to Infowars. And Infowars helped fueled the rumor that President Obama is an ISIS supporter, something Trump later suggested too. It remained to be seen whether the conspiracy-driven website remains a go-to for the president-elect. DONALD TRUMP, U.S. PRESIDENT-ELECT: Your reputation is amazing. I will not let you down. You will be very, very impressed I hope. And I think we'll be speaking a lot. KAYE: Randi Kaye, CNN, New York. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: And back with the panel. Jeffrey Lord, I got to go to you. I mean as a die-hard Trump supporters this man is going to be president of the United States, going, you know, following Infowars, talking about ... LORD: Right, I don't know anything ... COOPER: ... it was an inside job. LORD: Right, I don't know anything about Infowars. What I do know is this, in 2014, John Fund, whom many of us know here formerly with "The Wall Street Journal" and now with "National Review Online," wrote an article called "Non-citizens are voting," in which I'll just read one sentence. "In 2005, the U.S. Government Accountability Office found that up to 3 percent of the 30,000 people called for jury duty from voter registration roles over a two-year period and one of the 94 current U.S. district courts were non-citizens." And he goes on at length here with other examples. My point is, clearly, this is happening. Now, millions, I ... COOPER: That doesn't say those people actually voted. That's just ... LORD: Well, no, but they shouldn't be on registration roles, right? COOPER: There's dead people on registration roles. We know registration roles have lots of problem. LORD: Right, right, but they shouldn't be there, period. COOPER: Again, there's no evidence 3 million people voted illegally. LORD: I understand that and so the answer is we don't know, we don't know. COOPER: Right. LORD: Clearly, we don't know. COOPER: But doesn't it scare you that the president-elect is listening to Infowars? UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Right. LORD: No, I think the answer he was -- all kinds of people all over the place here. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Come on, Jeffrey. LORD: Look, Ronald Reagan got a pin for, you know, having friends who were members of the John Birch Society for heaven sakes. COOPER: They believe the 9/11 was an inside job. LORD: Right, right, of course. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: And Sandy Hook were ... COOPER: They believe all -- that Sandy Hook is all crisis actors. People I interviewed -- these -- they're followers ... LORD: I am not ... COOPER: ... the families of ... LORD: I'm not here to vouch for Infowars. I don't listen to Infowars. COOPER: Right, but the president-elect seems to. LORD: Right, right, but what I'm saying, other presidents, I mean, our good friend, and I wish he were here to defend himself, our good friend Van Jones had his problem with the Obama White House because he was accused of just that, unfairly, perhaps, I think, knowing Van Jones. But, nonetheless, there he was in the Obama White House, right? UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Are we really doing that? POWERS: Well, it was unfair. I think Van said that he ... LORD: Yes, I agree, but I'm just saying ... POWERS: Trump is not -- Trump is talking to him right there and we just watched it. I mean, it's not the same thing, you can't compare it. I mean, it's real ... COOPER: He's no longer a candidate. He's the president-elect of the United States. I mean, should his behavior, I mean, Alice, should his behavior change more? Do you think it sunk in that he is president- elect of the United States? ALICE STEWART, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Clearly we've seen a dramatic slow down in the tweets without a doubt. And I think the tone has changed slightly. I think with regard to this voting tweets he's put out, he should put a little bit more attribution to what he's talking about if there is some. I have seen some reports. COOPER: Right, because his tweets last night about Jeff Zeleny seemed to imply that he can say whatever he wants and that it's up to reporters to disprove him. Again, he is the president -- he's going to be the president of the United States. Should the president of the United States be putting out false information or information which he doesn't even have any proof? LORD: He watch your back as you can see. STEWART: Or attacking individuals who ... LORD: If you want your doctor you can keep him? COOPER: Well, again, I mean ... LORD: False information, right? RYE: No that's an old ... LORD: Well, the president of the ... COOPER: You can argue that that was done for political purposes. But this is ... UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: But I keep my doctor. COOPER: ... you know, with Donald Trump now and it doesn't worry you at all? RYE: Isn't it different, Anderson? It's different. You have someone who is not just putting out information. He's actually attacking people. He attacks the cast of "Hamilton." He attacked Jeff Zeleny, a CNN colleague. LORD: That's called free speech. RYE: No, no ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: All right, Margaret, you're on. HOOVER: Look, here's the problem. A lot of Republicans are stuck in this position. Look, there's this hopeful moment that Republicans never thought that they would have, right? So even Republicans who didn't support Donald Trump feel that maybe there's an opportunity to get real policy ... COOPER: Of course. (OFF-MIC) COOPER: Absolutely. It's a huge opportunity. HOOVER: And then we have these totally dichotomous experiences of really -- yes, having real concern about some of the sentiments and ideas that he's expressing through Twitter, the propaganda and the lies and the falsehood that he's propagating. That is serious concern. [20:45:12] COOPER: Actually, to me, it's not even the idea is necessarily, it's just the impulses to ... HOOVER: And what it represent. COOPER: ... continue in this way when, again, I just keep coming back is, again, I'm happy he's watching the show, but shouldn't he be reading a book, "The Looming Tower" by, you know, Lawrence Wright about the history of al-Qaeda, or ... LORD: Anderson ... RYE: Jeffrey, you said it's free speech but free speech doesn't mean it should be undisciplined, free speech doesn't mean it should attack a person, free speech doesn't mean it should lack the character ... COOPER: Jeffrey, I want you to be able to comment. LORD: And in fairness, every president does things their own way. Reagan specifically was accused of not reading his briefs. And you know what they did? COOPER: Right. LORD: They showed him movies about the ... (CROSSTALK) LORD: ... right? OK. So all I'm saying is Donald Trump is going to bring his own individual style here. COOPER: OK. LORD: Let's just give it a ... COOPER: But I'm just not sure watching cable shows late at night and tweeting about them is the best use of the president's time. STEWART: And also keep in mind ... BEGALA: And he's lying about the results. He lost my over 2 million votes, the popular vote, over 2 million votes and he's lying. STEWART: And he's met with over 60 foreign policy leaders and foreign leaders since he's been elected president-elect. So, he is getting information whether it's sitting down and reading a briefing book, he is talking with people and absorbing the information. COOPER: And this deal with Carrier which we're going to talk about just ahead. We'll have more on that, our breaking news, the air- conditioning and heating company, Carrier, announcing they have reached a deal with the Trump team to keep jobs in Indiana. We'll talk about that ahead. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) COOPER: As we reported at the beginning of the program, looks like the president-elect has made progress in something he talks about a lot on the campaign trail, Carrier, an air-conditioning manufacturer was going to move jobs to Mexico. The company tweeted tonight, "We are pleased to reach a deal with President-elect Trump and Vice President-elect Pence to keep close to a thousand jobs in Indy. More details soon." Back now with the panel. Well, someone (ph) who worked hard to defeat Donald Trump and this is clearly something he talked about on the campaign trail and can rightly stand and say, look, I made a difference here tonight. BEGALA: If true, it's great. It's terrific. Let's see the details. I do think we have a right to check the details because sometimes Mr. Trump sometimes gets a little over his ski tips. But if true, this would be an excellent example. COOPER: I mean it's a tweet from Carrier themselves. BEGALA: Yes. I'm not -- look, I'm trying to be as gracious as I can be. If true this is terrific and this is how the bully pulpit ought to be used. This is why Teddy Roosevelt called it the bully pulpit. I think that's great. If you're beaten up on a big corporation and you're the president that's kind of what people want to see. And I'd like to see more of that and a little less of beating up on reporters or college kids or the other things. But yes, if this is true I want to know the carrots and the sticks that you referred to earlier in the show. What giveaways did they get? What benefits, what gains? But, to hear the news, it's good news. COOPER: Right now, Alice, we've been, you know, critical of Donald Trump in this program tonight. STEWART: Right. COOPER: I think it is important to point out, you know, this -- he can rightly crow about this and point to this and say look, I'm not even president yet and I'm already making a difference just by having conversations. [20:50:05] STEWART: Sure. And he and Mike Pence are expected to go there and make big announcement this week, which I think is good. This goes to show that some of his economic policies, which would encourage businesses to keep their manufacturing plants here and the jobs here on American soil are working. And I do think this is a good sign and hopefully he'll be able to flesh this out and then incentivize other businesses to keep jobs and industry here in America. And I think this is a great first step. And I do think he deserves a lot of credit for it. LORD: You know the term hasn't escaped Donald Trump's lips yet, but when you see something like this you think, at least I do, historically, Franklin Roosevelt in 100 days. I mean, I am guessing here that the first 100 days of the Trump administration are going to be filled with action, action, action. HOOVER: And this is all -- this has Mike Pence written all over it, right? Obviously, this is Mike Pence's estate. He has relationships with his manufacturers, and working with them for a long time. He was clearly there working on the deal for his boss. But, you know, it does say something to the argument of Trump surrounding himself with able tacticians, politicians, but also people who can get deals done and then make him look good. So this is like one good category. And the other thing is, what we're going to see, and this is the beginning of a major shift in economic policy on the Republican side, so. COOPER: But it's easy -- I mean, it's easy to point to Mike Pence but, I mean, I think he also, if in fact is true, and we don't know the details, you do got to give credit to Donald Trump. He's the one who's out on the campaign trail was talking about it. HOOVER: And directed Mike Pence some ... RYE: Let me just push back on this a little bit. Initially, the conversation was about 2,000 jobs. So this is about saving half the jobs and leaving them here on American soil. The other, I think, it's important ... HOOVER: You're moving the bench, you're moving the focus. RYE: No, I'm not. This is what they said. They say they ... (CROSSTALK) RYE: ... 2,000 jobs was the point. And it's not 2,000 jobs. The other part is, initially he talked about imposing tariffs. He talked about penalizing companies that wanted to do this. It's clear from the deal that they at least began to discuss. He's talking about, if I lower your tax bracket, if I lower your tax rate, rather, will you keep the jobs here? COOPER: We don't know that. We don't know that. We don't know ... RYE: Well that's what's being ... COOPER: You could also say there was some comment last night that perhaps there was a threat of Carrier's other businesses being affected if they did this. So we don't know how this deal, whatever the deal was ... POWERS: And we also don't know what Congress ends up doing. So, to Paul's point, that's the big point here. We don't know what's going to actually end up happening. They'll be ... BEGALA: If we pinpoint (ph) back to Margaret though, for years, Democrats have been campaigning on this, Democrats have been calling for laws to punish corporations and shift jobs overseas, reward corporations to keep jobs here. Now, a Republican president-elect is doing something Democrats have called for a long time and the Democrats ... POWERS: I don't see -- yeah, but in Trump's defense, what stopped, you know, President Barack Obama from making the phone call, right? BEGALA: The phone call, you're right. POWERS: Yeah. BEGALA: Democrats tried to pass laws, but Republicans blocked it on the hill. POWERS: OK, but that's -- I think for a lot of Americans like this is what they want to see. COOPER: Right. POWERS: They want to see somebody who just picks up the phone, sees a problem, and fixes it. And they find out how we fixed it but ... STEWART: I don't people care if it's a carrot or a stick, the fact is they're keeping jobs here in America. COOPER: I want to thank everybody in the panel. Just ahead, more breaking news. The National Parks Service says people are to blame for the deadly wildfires raging eastern Tennessee. The death toll now stands at the three. Walls of flames, I mean, look at these images, thousands have fled their homes, for some barely in the nick of time. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Oh, shit. Why is every cabin on fire? (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:55:46] COOPER: I want to get you to the latest breaking news about the wildfires raging in eastern Tennessee. At least three people now confirmed dead. The fires, which started yesterday, destroyed more than 250 billions of -- 250 buildings, forced thousands of people to flee their homes as walls of fire were closing in. This video captures just some of the terror. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Everything is burning around us, every cabin, everything. There you go. We're not going to make it across that road. Shit. Oh, (expletive deleted). Oh, shit. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: You're good. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Wow. It's OK, run it. (Expletive deleted). Hit the gas. Hit the gas. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Fires just all around that vehicle. And here's Brian Todd with the latest. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) BRIAN TODD, CNN CORRESPONDENT: An orange glow fills the night sky as one of the many fires burns in and around the Tennessee resort towns of Gatlinburg and Pigeon Forge. Officials say severe drought and hurricane-forced wind gusts combined to fuel a "perfect storm." GREG MILLER, GATLINBURG FIRE CHIEF: Those winds of that nature, it is common to pick up embers of fire and take them greater than a mile away. At the same time we were facing that challenge, those high winds were knocking down trees, those trees were hitting power lines, and they were falling on this very dry, extreme drought-like condition, and everything was catching on fire. TODD: The fire is forcing mass evacuations, sending residents and tourists into nearby Red Cross shelters. Popular area attractions were under threat, including Ripley's Aquarium of the Smokies, which houses 1,500 animals and marine life and the Dollywood theme park. At least 150 homes and businesses damaged or destroyed, including this 16-storey hotel complex in Gatlinburg. A guest shot this video before escaping. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: With all of the previous fires I've been part of could not have prepared me for what we have experienced over the past 24 hours. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: What's the latest on how this fire started? TODD: Well, Anderson, a short time ago I talked to a National Park Service official and she told me that this set of fires was human caused. I pressed her several times on whether that means this was arson, she would not go there. She said it is human caused and it is under investigation. But a few minutes later, she did tell me, "We'd love to catch this person." So, while they're not maybe ready to draw the line directly yet to arson they seem to be getting pretty close to that. COOPER: All right, Brian Todd. Brian, thanks. In a moment, at the top of the hour news CNN Special Report, "War in Space: The Next Battlefield." Here is the nightmare scenario, U.S. satellites in space targeted and destroyed everything from bank transactions to stock market to traffic lights, GPS navigation for airline pilots freeze, smart bombs could become dumb, T.Vs, the internet, cell phones could stop working. U.S. military spending billions to protect against a potential attack. Here's a quick preview of the Special Report from CNN's Jim Sciutto. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) JIM SCIUTTO, CNN CORREPONDENT: Weapons fired from earth is one thing, but now the U.S. is considering capabilities it could deploy on the front lines in space, arming satellites. ROBERT WORK, DEPUTY DEFENSE SECRETARY: You could have weapons that could be fired against the weapons that are coming at you. SCIUTTO: Secretary Work raised the possibility of arming satellites with weapons he compared to the death charges that Navy surface ships use to defend against enemy submarines during World War II. WORK: And so, you can imagine us doing that type of activity in space. Essentially, it would all be defensive of a nature, trying to keep our satellites from being destroyed. So, some people might say, well, that sounds like offensive war in space to me. We look at this as totally defensive. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: A whole new kind of warfare. That does it for us. The CNN Special Report, "WAR IN SPACE: THE NEXT BATTLEFIELD" starts right now. Police: OSU Attack Possibly Terrorism; President-Elect Falsely Claims Millions Voted Illegally; Jill Stein Speaks Out On Recount Effort; Pence: "Number of Very Important Announcements Tomorrow"; W.H.: Trump, Obama Spoken A "Handful of Times". Aired 8-9p ET Aired November 28, 2016 - 20:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. [20:00:14] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening. Thanks for joining us. Day 20 of the Trump transition has been high on drama and intrigue. We'll get to all of that shortly. But from internal feuding over whether Mitt Romney should be tapped to be secretary of state, to allegations of voter fraud, absent any evince at all coming from the president-elect, himself, to the recount effort being steered by green party candidate Jill Stein. She joins us tonight. But, first, the breaking news from Ohio. Tonight, investigators are working to determine if an attack on the campus of Ohio State University was, in fact, terrorism. The source telling CNN the attacker posted grievances about attacks on Muslims on Facebook. This morning, students just returning from Thanksgiving break came face to face with the unthinkable. A car drove into a crowd, a man with a knife jumped out. He hurt 11 people before he himself was shot dead. Now, as we do on 360, in situations like this, we try not to overuse the attacker's name as to not to give him the attention he might crave. But what we do think is important is that you're aware of, and what else we're learning as authorities continue to look for clues. Brynn Gingras has the latest. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) BRYNN GINGRAS, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): Tonight, university police naming the suspected attacker as OSU student Abdul Razak Ali Artan. A federal law enforcement official tells CNN he was a Somali citizen who lived in the area. A U.S. official says he was a legal permanent resident. Investigators are still working on determining motive, and can't rule out terror at this point. CHIEF KIM JACOBS, COLUMBUS, OHIO POLICE: We have to consider that it is that possibility. You know, we had an attack earlier this year with a man with a knife causing multiple injuries. So, we're always aware that that's the potential and we're going to continue to look at that. That's why our federal partners are and helping. GINGRAS: Police say the attacker deliberately jumped the curb with a car and rammed into a group of pedestrians. A federal official tells CNN the car used in the attack was registered to a family member. MONICA MOIL, PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR, OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY: Around 9:52 a.m., the emergency dispatch center got a report that a vehicle had struck pedestrians. GINGRAS: He then continued to attack, slashing people with a knife. CHIEF CRAIG STONE, OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY POLICE: He exits the vehicle and used a butcher knife to start cutting pedestrians. GINGRAS: Less than a minute later, the attacker was confronted by a police officer. STONE: He engaged the suspect and he eliminated the threat. The suspect is DOA. GINGRAS: Within minutes of the attack, a campus-wide alert went out reporting an active shooter on campus, run, hide, fight. A federal law enforcement official tells CNN the gunshots reported may have been of the police officers shooting the attacker. On campus, students and faculty blocked doorways and hid while waiting for the all clear. ANTHONY FALZERANO, OHIO STATE STUDENT: Our teacher ran and locked the door and at the same time we all saw a ton of -- we heard a bunch of sirens and a bunch of, like, cop cars all just started flooding towards that area. RACHEL LEMASTER, OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEE: It's -- it's scary. It's really scary. We barricaded ourselves in our rooms like we were taught. Turned off our lights. And just hunkered down. (END VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Brynn, it seems like the police officer who finally shot this attacker got there really quick. What more do we know about him? GINGRAS: Well, we know, Anderson, that his name is Alan Horujko. He's 28 years old, hasn't even been part of the OSU police force for two years. So, very, very new to this department. We also know at one point, he was an OSU student, himself. And, yes, law enforcement says he was in the right place at the right time, but at the same time, he did act quickly, killing the suspect in this in less than one minute when those attacks -- after those attacks, rather, started. So, certainly, a lot of credit is owed to him because ten people were injured, all non-life threatening injuries, Anderson. COOPER: Yes, Brynn Gingras, thanks very much, Brynn. CNN producer Shimon Prokupecz has been working the story as well. He joins us now. What more do you know about the attacker's social media posting? Because that's obviously something investigators are looking closely at. SHIMON PROKUPECZ, CNN PRODUCER: Yes, Anderson, actually, it's a big clue into his state of mind right now. It's really all that investigators have to go on. In the posting, which we're told by sources, the posting was posted sort of moments before, short time before the attack. But it's clear that it took some time to write. It's pretty lengthy and he goes on a sort of tirade about how Muslims are being attacked by Americans. And that if the U.S. wanted lone- wolf attacks to stop, they would sort of stop killing Muslims is what he's saying. It just goes on to this whole -- his issues with the United States and their treatment of Muslims and he doesn't really specify exactly why he's doing this. He does mention, and, again, we've seen this in other attacks, Anwar Awlaki, you know, this cleric who the U.S. killed years ago in the drone attack, whose name still surfaces in some of these attacks, folks look to him for inspiration. [20:05:00] COOPER: You know, sometimes the more investigators look at these people, they use sort of terrorism as a cloak, but also they have other problems going on. Are there any other signs about what was going on in this person's life? PROKUPECZ: Yes, there are some other clues. The family, specifically, the mother has told community members, has told law enforcement he was having some problems at school. She says the problems were with grades. But there was a story from the college, from the university newspaper that says that he was complaining that not having enough space to pray, he didn't have the right places. He couldn't pray as openly as he wanted to and the newspaper had published that story again today sort of reminding folks, hey, back in August, you know, he had complained to us about some of the issues at the school and not being able to pray. COOPER: What's the next step for investigators tonight? PROKUPECZ: So, they're sort of talking to family. That's what they're doing tonight. They're talking to family, they're talking to their friends, the police have said that they're waiting for search warrants at their home. Also, we're told that some devices were recovered from his vehicle. So they're waiting to get search warrants for that. So, they really, I think, right now want to see if he was consuming any other propaganda. Was he consuming any other propaganda, was he consuming ISIS propaganda? Was he viewing these Awlaki videos for inspiration for this attack? So, those are really the steps. Also the big thing is to make sure he wasn't working with anyone else and also was he communicating with anyone overseas? There are no signs of that right now. They're also telling us, authorities are telling us that anyone's radar. This guy just for whatever reason decided today to do this attack. COOPER: All right. Shimon Prokupecz, thanks very much. Lots to discuss. Joining me now, CNN counterterrorism analyst Phil Mudd. He served as a senior official in both the CIA and FBI. Also, CNN national security analyst Peter Bergen, whose books about terrorism include "The United States of Jihad." Phil, I mean, I imagine viewers listening to this hear people saying, well, we're not sure if it's terrorism yet. You put the pieces together. Obviously, you know, he's talking about grievances against Muslims. At the very least, he wants to be identified as his act, the act of a terrorist. PHIL MUDD, CNN COUNTERTERRORISM ANALYST: He may want to but the speed with which the American people want answers is not the same as the speed, the velocity of the investigation. Look, we have to understand his job history. We have to understand girlfriends, ex-girlfriends, family history, who he might have been communicating with online. What his Google search history is. So, we have a couple of clues here that might suggest mindset. We don't have answers from things like interviews and online searches that give us final -- a final resolution. The problem in this case, Anderson, is over the course of the night, people are going to conclusion, why can't the Feds reach theirs? That might take a couple weeks, a month, especially in a case where you have a singleton where you can't look at his communications with the co-conspirator that might offer other clues. COOPER: Peter, "The United States of Jihad", your last book, you wrote, basically analyzed every jihadist or would-be jihadist in $e United States. Where does this guy fit into it and what jumps out at you? PETER BERGEN, AUTHOR, "UNITED STATES OF JIHAD": I thought it was interesting the Facebook postings were all so recent according to Shimon. That reminds me of the Orlando attack where he posted on Facebook his pledge to is sort of as the attack went on. It reminds me of the San Bernardino attack where the couple also posted their vision to ISIS as the attack went down. That's one interesting thing that leapt out at me, Anderson. The other thing, he doesn't fit the profile of a lot of people I looked at. He's a lot younger than the average jihadist terrorist we've seen in this country. You know, he's actually very, very much younger, aged 18. So, that's sort of unusual. You know, as Phil says, we'll know more. In about a third of these cases, Anderson, of these lone-wolf attacks, we see some kind of history of mental instability. Now, we he no evidence of that yet, but that's something certainly investigators would looking at. COOPER: Phil, you hear -- Shimon saying, well, his mom said he had trouble at school. Plenty of people have trouble at school. And, you know, things like driving a car into a crowd, that's something that ISIS and other groups have encouraged people to do. What does it tell you, I mean, if ISIS -- is this a sign of ISIS' strength or weakness or, I mean, assuming he's in some way trying to follow some sort of direction of jihadists? MUDD: I look at this and say, you know, I'm talking to my family, for example, is this an indicator, as you're saying, that ISIS is on the rise? Two and a half years ago, we saw this sort of fireball of is moving across the sky, gobbling up territory in Iraq, talking to Americans, to British, to Europeans to come join the caliphate. COOPER: And we saw people trying to leave. MUDD: That's right. Now, you have the FBI and more recently European security services saying they're seeing fewer kids go over. ISIS, itself, has said please don't come here. More leaders are being killed in the battlefield. Obviously, they've lost a lot of geography. You should look at this as one of the embers of a dying organization. Not as an indicator that that organization that ISIS is still burning as bright as it did two years ago. COOPER: But, I mean, you know, a dying ember can still burn a lot of people. [20:10:01] I mean, if somebody is using whatever weapons they have at hand, a vehicle, butcher's knife, you know, short of getting that person on the radar beforehand, that's a tough thing to try to stop. MUDD: That's right, Anderson. But let me bookend something for you. We have a relatively unsophisticated attack here. A small vehicle with a knife. Go back two days. The biggest football game of the season, Ohio State and Michigan is held over the weekend. Huge group of people. COOPER: Right. MUDD: I wouldn't offer a clue to terrorists, they've already done this. If you really want to think through this as a trained ISIS operative, clearly he went, rent a truck, get a weapon, videotape for social media and drive through that kind of crowd. We didn't see any of that here. COOPER: That's certainly something obviously we saw in, you know, in Cannes over the summer, a guy in a truck just driving through a crowd. So, you know -- BERGEN: Yes, and he killed 86 people. So, you know -- COOPER: Excuse me, Nice. I'm sorry. BERGEN: Yes. And, you know, as we've seen in school shootings, Anderson, I think that there's often a copycat quality to some of these attacks. School shooters tend to study previous school shootings. Terrorists often do the same. Obviously, this guy luckily didn't achieve the effect that he was hoping for. COOPER: Yes. Peter Bergen, Phil Mudd, appreciate you being with us. Coming up, President-elect Donald Trump falsely says he won the popular vote when the truth is he's actually losing to Hillary Clinton by more than 2 million votes and counting. Not that that matters because he won. He claims, this is not true, that the reason she got more votes because millions people voted illegally. That's not the only falsehood he's been spreading on Twitter. We'll take a look at that next. We'll also hear from the Green Party's Jill Stein who is initiating recounts in Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Michigan. She's getting a lot of donations, millions of dollars to do it. What she told me about what's behind the effort and some other things. Well, we'll ask her some tough questions when 360 continues. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:15:38] COOPER: Twenty days after the election, drama has not stopped. There's a public debate going on among the Trump transition team about who should be secretary of state. We'll get to that a little bit later. There's also a call for recount in three states, an effort for which Green Party candidate Jill Stein has raised $6 million so far. We're going to here from her in a moment. The Clinton campaign joined the recount effort and the president-elect has slammed it in a Twitter storm. But one problem, not all his tweets are true. Suzanne Malveaux tonight keeping him honest. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) SUZANNE MALVEAUX, CNN NATIONAL POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): Donald Trump is spreading false claims about the election he won. The president-elect tweeting, "In addition to winning the Electoral College in a landslide, I won the popular vote if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally." Trump who now trails Hillary Clinton by more than 2 million votes in the latest national count, offering no evidence to back up his statement about millions of illegal ballots. DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL-ELECT: Unbelievable. MALVEAUX: Echoing themes from his campaign. TRUMP: It is a rigged system, and be careful with the voting. Be careful with everything. MALVEAUX: Trump is raising unfounded allegations of voter fraud in three states he lost. Tweeting, "serious voter fraud in Virginia, New Hampshire and California. So, why isn't the media reporting on this? Serious bias. Big problem." Leaders in all three states pushed back saying their elections were fair. Some Trump allies are urging him to let it go. REP. CHRIS COLLINS (R), NEW YORK: He is the president-elect. It is time to move forward MALVEAUX: Trump salvos come as a recount moves forward in Wisconsin, where election officials rebuke the president-elect for casting doubts about the integrity of the voting process. MARK THOMSEN, CHAIRMAN, WISCONSIN ELECTIONS COMMISSION: Personally, I'd like him to come down out of his Trump Tower and spend the time with the folks on the ground that are counting these votes. To say that people are counting illegal votes is an insult to the people that run our election. MALVEAUX: The bipartisan Election Commission today signed off on a plan to complete a new statewide tally by mid-December. The recount push is being led by Green Party candidate, Jill Stein, but the Clinton campaign is also taking part in the process. A lawyer for the Clinton campaign saying it is doing so to ensure that it is fair to all sides, adding that the campaign has found no evidence of hacking of voting systems. Trump who currently leads Clinton in the state by more than 20,000 votes out of nearly 3 million cast calls the recount a scam. Wisconsin officials say they are confident that Trump's margin will hold once the recount is finished. THOMSEN: I fully expect, given the history of how elections are conducted in Wisconsin, and their accuracy, and I don't expect that the outcome will be qualitatively different. (END VIDEOTAPE) COOPER: Suzanne Malveaux joins us now. What is next for the recounts that are likely to move forward in several states? MALVEAUX: Well, good evening, Anderson. Today, Michigan secretary of state announced Trump has officially won that state, so it brings Trump's electoral total to 306. That's compared to Clinton's 232. Trump winning Michigan now by 10,704 votes. Now, Stein is initiating recounts in the three states where Trump destroyed her so-called blue wall. That is Wisconsin, it's Michigan and it's Pennsylvania. Wisconsin has already vowed to begin its recount in all 72 counties. Wednesday is the deadline to petition a recount in Michigan, and today, we saw Pennsylvania getting challenged. So, Stein's camp is insisting that she has the million dollars that's necessary to actually pay for these recounts, but, Anderson, in the meantime, Trump's transition team, well, they have been unable to provide any credible evidence that millions of people voted illegally in those states, or really any states -- Anderson. COOPER: Suzanne Malveaux, Suzanne, thanks very much. We'll talk to Dr. Stein and also ask her if she has evidence for her allegations. Lots to talk about. Joining me tonight, former Georgia Congressman Jack Kingston, CNN political commentator and Democratic strategist Paul Begala, adviser to a pro-Clinton super PAC. "Wall Street Journal's" senior special writer, Monica Langley. CNN political commentator and Trump supporter Kayleigh McEnany. CNN political analyst and journalist and author Carl Bernstein, and CNN political commentator and Republican strategist, Ana Navarro. Monica, you were at Trump Tower today. MONICA LANGLEY, WALL STREET JOURNAL: Right. COOPER: What did you learn about the president-elect's motivation for these tweets about illegal voters? LANGLEY: Well, you know, he still likes to tweet. [20:20:01] And when I was there today, the transition team cannot give an answer about what he's talking about because they had no clue he was going to tweet. COOPER: They -- that was not on their agenda. LANGLEY: That was not on their agenda. They had no idea that he was going to tweet. I asked them, what is the evidence? They didn't know. They didn't know that he was going to tweet. And then, I said when will you all maybe talk to him about tweeting less and they said, oh, we're sure it will happen as the date approaches for inauguration. And to be honest, this person, one person I spoke with said I'm not going to be the one to tell him to stop tweeting. So, none of them really want to tell him. I'll tell you the one person who can talk to him about refraining from tweeting is his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. So, we'll have to see when that happens. COOPER: Kayleigh, what did you make of this? I mean, is it presidential for the president-elect to be tweeting these kind of conspiracy theories? KAYLEIGH MCENANY, TRUMP SUPPORTER: What I think he's really wanting to do is bring attention to an issue that's been deafly ignored by many, many people despite having evidence of there being voter fraud. We know there are 400 convictions listed on Heritage Foundation's website. We know there was a study done using congressional data, yes, congressional data that the left is trying to debunk, but it does exist and is there and it's credible. The 6.4 percent of illegal immigrants voted in 2012. So, there is some evidence. Were there millions and millions and millions of votes this time? Honestly, none of us know. No one at this panel knows because there's no way to track this. So, I think he's calling attention to a problem that needs to be remedied before the next election. COOPER: Carl? CARL BERNSTEIN, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: This is the Kool-Aid talking points I hate to see. I tweeted yesterday saying if Richard Nixon had a Twitter account, it wouldn't be as paranoid as what Trump is putting out there. He is living in a fact-free universe. And it ought to be very concerning to all of us, especially Republicans. That at this point in the transition process, he is spreading these kind of misinformation, disinformation that's spread on fake news sites, et cetera, and that the president-elect of the United States is trafficking in lies. This is a huge problem, and the press ought to be concerned about it -- COOPER: You think he -- you think he knows it's not true, but he's still tweeting it? BERNSTEIN: If he doesn't know that it's t true, it's even worse. COOPER: Ana, what do you make of it? ANA NAVARRO, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Well, listen, I'm going to disagree with you. I will tell you, he actually did tweet out something true this weekend. He tweeted out "Fidel is dead." BERNSTEIN: That's true, he did, with an exclamation point. NAVARRO: Yes. I think he's -- COOPER: We should point out, you're not a fan of Donald Trump. NAVARRO: Or of Fidel's. (LAUGHTER) NAVARRO: Look, I think he's irritated. I think he's irritated that Jill Stein is leading the recount effort. I think he's irritated that he didn't win the popular vote. That, in fact, the margin keeps growing. And we all know that when Donald Trump gets irritated, he often tweets out his frustration and irritation. COOPER: I think Ana raises a good point, I'm wondering if you have any info on this, is there an irritation on this part that he feels, you know, he was gracious to Hillary Clinton -- LANGLEY: Totally. COOPER: -- and that suddenly now the Clinton campaign is saying we're going to go along with this just -- LANGLEY: That is exactly -- COOPER: For Donald Trump, like his perception of being fair is at the heart, it seems, of so much for him. LANGLEY: You hit the nail on the head. He believes he acted in a magnanimous way, that he made a classy move when he said "I do not have an interest in prosecuting Hillary Clinton for her e-mail." And then she comes along after conceding the election, and says she's recount effort. And he says this is a classless move. COOPER: He used Twitter out of -- LANGLEY: Yes. COOPER: OK. LANGLEY: And he says bring it on. I mean, his position is, bring on the recount, I have some states I might want recounted, the ones that he lost. JACK KINGSTON, TRUMP SUPPORTER: I just want to point -- COOPER: Congressman, go ahead. KINGSTON: I want to point out, though, that Pew Trust came out with a study said 24 million people who are registered to vote aren't eligible to be registered or registered illegally, 1.8 million are dead and 2.75 million are registered in more than one state. So, there is some fact that there are voting problems and as Kayleigh pointed out, over 400 have been documented. I think in every election, there are some. But do think the irritation factor, the fact he has taken the high road, Hillary Clinton conceded, Barack Obama is saying the election's over with, let's move on with the transition, and yet Hillary Clinton may be using Jill Stein as a front to just get in there and -- (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Paul, to the congressman's point, I mean, when the Green Party in 2004 paid for a recount in Ohio, the only difference was George Bush got 300 less votes, still won the state of Ohio. So, I mean, it's not as if it's a million people here or there, it's a couple hundred people here or there. PAUL BEGALA, CNN POLITICAL COMMENTATOR: Right, and I will say, Secretary Clinton's campaign said, we don't think there is fraud, but since someone else is pursuing a recount, we have an obligation to protect our interests and make sure it's fair. That's all they're saying. Secretary Clinton is not calling for this recount, and I tell you, a couple weeks ago I would have said, probably what Carl said, Trump's a liar, he's nuts, he's a conspiracy theorist. No. [20:25:00] He's a genius. I'm not playing around. He's a genius at the media manipulation. Look at what he does. He settles the lawsuit for fraud with Trump University, pays $25 million to people who are accusing him of fraud. Admitting no wrongdoing, but paying $25 million. What does he do the next day? He attacks the cast of "Hamilton," a Broadway show. He attacks the cast of "Saturday Night Live." I don't think Donald Trump gives a rip snort about "Hamilton" or "SNL." He distracted the press from the Trump University fraud suit. What's he doing now? "The New York Times" on a Sunday runs a major story, massive conflicts of interest and for Trump in Brazil, in India, in the Philippines, in Ireland, in Scotland, in Turkey. What does Trump do? Rather than answer these really legitimate massive problems, he says, oh, recount panic, recount, millions of people voting. He knows exactly what he's doing. He is the most brilliant media manipulator I've seen in my life. He's strategic about this. He is not crazy. KINGSTON: But I think there's the huge case that Jill Stein is actually generating money. She's raising money she never could as a candidate. Why is that possible? I think she also has some guilt therapy. She's thinking, oh, golly, you know, I may have helped Donald Trump get elected. COOPER: She argues against that. She says the evidence doesn't show that at all. That a lot of the Green Party voters wouldn't have even come out to vote. I'm just telling you what -- KINGSTON: But this also gives her her platform back. She now is relevant again. COOPER: Right. Also, I mean, look, Laurence Tribe at Harvard was saying, you know, she wants to be on the national stage. It's not just money, which is going to the recount effort, she says, but it also allows her to build up a mailing list. It allows her to build up -- KINGSTON: She wants that mantle -- NAVARRO: Why would that bother Trump? It's not like anybody that's donating to Jill Stein would be giving to his inaugural committee. (CROSSTALK) BEGALA: No, he wants to distract us from his conflict of interest, people. The guy knows what he's doing. NAVARRO: He and his surrogates have gone out on a campaign against Hillary Clinton. She's not -- she's not Washington charging to Delaware. I mean, she's been -- (CROSSTALK) COOPER: We got a lot more to talk about with the panel ahead. Coming up next, we're going to hear from Green Party candidate Jill Stein who is leading the recount efforts in three states. She tells me what she hopes to accomplish. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:31:03] COOPER: More breaking news tonight. Green Party candidate Jill Stein announced that today her supporters filed a legal petition seeking a recount Pennsylvania. That's one of three states she's focusing on her recount effort along with Wisconsin and Michigan. The Wisconsin recount is set to get under way later this week. And the Clinton campaign is now onboard. I spoke with Jill Stein a short time ago. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Dr. Stein, at this point, do you have any evidence at all, actual evidence, of voter fraud, of fraud at the ballot boxes? JILL STEIN, FORMER GREEN PARTY PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: No. What we have are predictors that if tampering took place, that it would be most likely to be discovered in the three states where we are looking, but it's like when you get into an airplane, you do not want to have evidence that the airplane is rapidly losing altitude before you create a backup system to be sure your airplane has a safety net, that it has built-in quality assurance. That's what we're calling for in this election and in all elections that we need to have a system that we can be confident in. COOPER: You're talking about potential hacking and obviously there have been instances and obviously DNC e-mails were hacked, there were, you know, were attempts to get into -- and efforts to get into various voter databases. But the FBI has been investigating that, and I assume continues to investigate that and even the Clinton campaign, their counsel says they've had lawyers and data analysts and programmers looking since the results and have not uncovered any actionable evidence. STEIN: That's right, and what the people who watchdog the voting machine equipment, what they will be very quick will to tell you is that this is something you cannot see unless you actually count the ballots. There is otherwise no standard against which to measure it. So unless we actually look, we will never know. When Donald Trump said that the election was rigged, he had a lot of resonance. Maybe for different reasons than what he was talking about, when Bernie Sanders talked about the economy being rigged, that had enormous resonance. That's not going away and that applies to the upcoming of the vote as well. We're saying ... COOPER: But without having actual evidence. STEIN: ... we deserve a vote that we can have confidence in. COOPER: Without having evidence, aren't you actually contributing to and perhaps unfairly to that lack of confidence in the actual system, itself? STEIN: You know, if you believe that you can just sweep things under the rug and they'll get better, you know, you might buy that. COOPER: You know, I'm not, but the FBI -- but do it you not believe the FBI is investigating any potential hacks? STEIN: What the voting technology experts tell us is you cannot tell unless you're actually counting the paper votes. And I don't think the FBI has done that. COOPER: Well, you know, one of the key people who gave rise to this talk initially of hacking and a recount was a man named J. Alex Halderman is a professor of computer science at the University of Michigan. He, himself, had said that he believes the most likely explanation of the polls were systemically wrong rather than the election was hacked. STEIN: And he, himself, says, but that shouldn't stop us from finding out. He, himself, is a very strong advocate of going forward with this inquiry and with the recount of the paper ballots so that we can actually find out, otherwise you don't know. You're flying blind. COOPER: Donald Trump, as you know, has accused you of trying to fill your own coffers by doing this. Can you guarantee that all the money goes -- that you're raising, millions of dollars -- goes to the recount effort and any money that's left over, what happens to that? STEIN: Absolutely. And this is all transparent on our website. You have the budget there as to exactly how this is being budgeted, but it's all going into a dedicated recount fund which is not accessible to the campaign. The campaign and the party do not have access ... COOPER: And what happens to it afterward if there's more left over? STEIN: Well, we don't expect there to be money left over. If it turns out that there is, we'll dispose of it according to FEC guidelines. COOPER: And are you creating a mailing list off this or creating a database of this for your own future use? [20:35:02] STEIN: You know, we don't have plans at the moment, but, you know ... COOPER: But you are collecting names and contact information of the people donating money. STEIN: That -- that is always the case, but, you know, there are a lot of voters who feel like this is a really critical movement and it's a need that hasn't been filled by the other parties, and we intend to carry this movement forward. This is a deeply felt need of voters coming out of this deeply painful election who want to take a step forward and do something really positive and not simply wallow in the cynicism which is actually quite broad spread right now. I think this is a wonderful sign of people standing up to ensure that we create this promise of democracy that we're supposed to have. COOPER: You're saying it's a painful election for obviously for about half the country, it was not a painful election, it was actually a very positive election because their candidate, Donald Trump, won. You would said at a town hall ... STEIN: Well, that's not half of the country. Let me put it that way. You know, it's almost half of the voters who did not see reason to come out and vote. So we got a problem here. COOPER: Well you'd said at a CNN town hall in August that you would have trouble sleeping at night its either Donald Trump or Hillary Clinton was elected. I mean the obvious question is, would you be asking for this recount if, in fact, Hillary Clinton was elected? STEIN: I was asked many times during the campaign if I would stand up and launch a recount if there were reasons to question the vote. And I have always been committed that yes, I will do that. I will step up to the plate if there was reason to need to verify our votes. COOPER: Dr. Stein, appreciate your time. Thank you. STEIN: Thank you so much. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Well, just ahead more breaking news. Vice president-elect Mike Pence says team Trump will be making some very important announcements tomorrow. President-elect Trump and Mitt Romney are scheduled to talk in private over dinner tomorrow. Their second meeting is speculation and controversy swirl over who Trump will choose to be secretary of state. More on that ahead. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:40:46] COOPER: More breaking news tonight. Vice president Mike Pence says there will be a number of important announcements tomorrow from the Trump transition team. President-elect Trump had a busy day of meetings at Trump Tower, including one with former CIA Director and Army General David Petraeus. The lobby of the 5th Avenue high-rise has become a cat walk of sorts for a potential candidates for key cabinet staff positions. Phil Mattingly has been watching the arrivals and departures. He joins us now. So a lot of comings and goings over Trump Tower today, including General Petraeus. What's the latest? PHIL MATTINGLY, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yeah, I think what Mike Pence said coming out of Trump Tower tonight was the most important thing. Look, there's been a lot of focus on this Secretary of State round robin of sorts and certainly General Petraeus' appearance and sit-down with Donald Trump is an important aspect, if that Donald Trump the president-elect tweeting after that meeting he was very impressed with General Petraeus. General Petraeus talking to reporters afterwards, Anderson, and saying he was impressed with the president-elect's grasp on world events. But I do think it's important to note based on what the vice president-elect said tonight, not to focus necessarily on the Secretary of State but other positions that are out there. While we've been all focus on the big, bold names the president-elect and his team have held dozens of meetings over the last couple weeks, Anderson. And what I'm told right now from Trump transition sources is, expect the economic team to start rolling out soon. We know Wilbur Ross, the distressed that billionaire investor is expected to get the commerce secretary position. That should be announced soon. Treasury secretary Steve Mnuchin, a financier who is Donald Trump's campaign finance chairman is the front-runner for that. But Bill Allison a former bank CEO was meeting inside Trump Tower today. He is in there as well. So expect those types of announcements to be coming before that secretary of state announcement. Well Trump transition officials Anderson make clear there's a lot of heat and light on that secretary of state pick, there are other selections that are coming and coming very soon. COOPER: Over the weekend, there was some reporting, speculation that Trump was angered by some of the comments that Kellyanne Conway made about Governor Romney publicly as a possible pick for Secretary of State. What have you been hearing about that? MATTINGLY: So I think it's important as you kind of take a step back a look what's actually happening here that this is more of an internal fight between senior advisers and it's very clear, Kellyanne Conway, the campaign manager who's still a very trusted voice inside the Trump operation, has a very clear view on Mitt Romney. And there are other people inside the team that have a very clear view opposed to where Kellyanne Conway sits and that's something that's actually pretty normal as advisers try and figure out transitions. What we're not used to is this spilling out into public. And when you ask Kellyanne Conway why this has become so public, she made it clear, she's giving the public the same advice that she's giving the president-elect behind the scenes. Now, in terms of discord between the president-elect and his former campaign manager, now senior adviser, I'll point to a tweet that just came out about 30 minutes ago from Kellyanne Conway, huddled over the top of Donald Trump the president-elect in his office saying, they're working hard into the night. It's the honor and privilege of her lifetime to work for this. Trying to tamp down any talk about discord. But what I would say, Anderson, and I think it's important to note, as this all continues to play out, this is more of a staff-on-staff conflict than a principal versus staff conflict. There is a reality though, this is unusual, it's not usual to see the things spill out into public. And I think that's something the president-elect and his team recognize and are trying to head off in this point of the game. COOPER: All right, Phil Mattingly, thanks very much. A lots to discuss. Back with the panel. Monica, I mean you spent a lot of time in Trump Tower. Do you put any credence this notion that Kellyanne Conway went rogue? Because that ... LANGLEY: Absolutely. COOPER: ... it seemed like the going rogue type. LANGLEY: Absolutely not. COOPER: Not. LANGLEY: She did not go rogue. And I was at Trump Tower today, and I know her well, I know Donald Trump well. Everything that Kellyanne Conway does is with the blessing of Donald Trump. So I check with numerous people today and Donald Trump was happy with her position that she took. So he -- she ... COOPER: What would be his motivation for wanting her to publicly state ... LANGLEY: Especially knowing that Romney is coming over there tomorrow ... COOPER: Right. LANGLEY: The position is that he has not been loyal to him, Giuliani has. I can tell you the staff there is very behind Giuliani and that includes Kellyanne. However, Donald Trump was asked today in a meeting, I was not in this meeting, but he was asked in a meeting that was repeated to me, are you really irritated with Kellyanne? And he said, absolutely not, I love Kellyanne. So and everybody else said she does not do anything that's not sanctioned by Mr. Trump. The rationale for him to do that is to let it be known out there to people who are seeing Romney come in, look, I understand all your problems with Mitt Romney. I have some of the same concerns as well. He's not going to come out say them on a Sunday shows Kellyanne did it for him. [20:45:14] COOPER: Paul where -- how do you use. BEGALA: Well for some I would never second guess Monica's reporting, it's been spot-on. It is extraordinary to see this played out in public this way. But, first let's abandon the stroke that we all say, loyalty is important to Donald Trump, we all say that like it's -- like it's a tautology, like breakfast is the most important meal. Well no, actually, it's not and Trump doesn't give a rip snort about loyalty, he's had three wives, three political parties, three campaign managers. In fact one of them, Kellyanne Conway, bitterly attacked Donald Trump in the primaries. They called -- said that he was vulgar, that he was whining. COOPER: She was backing Ted Cruz at the time. BEGALA: She was. So yes, she certainly didn't go as far as Governor Romney, but she was also someone who is a very sharp Trump critic. So, and actually I think this is a good thing. President-elect needs not to put loyalty first. Needs to put the country first. Now, how and why Mitt Romney is the best person to be secretary of state is above my pay grade. But this notion that somehow you should only have the people who were with you in the campaign is nuts. I helped persuade Hillary to take the job as Secretary of State under Obama. And believe me, everyone in that Obama campaign was against Hillary. But they didn't take it public. They kept it private, they deferred to the president-elect. COOPER: The flip side of this argument is, it is sort of interesting, and -- I mean you could make the argument that this is about transparency and we're sort of seeing the inner workings of the comings and goings and maybe that's a good thing. BERNSTEIN: First, Paul said something brilliant earlier about Trump and his manipulation of the media and this is part of it. He loves this show. I think based partly on speculation and partly on a little bit of knowledge that Trump has been affected and impressed by two people he's talked to. Kissinger and president of the United States. I think they both have had a real impression on him about the seriousness of this pick and the fact that the other national security people that he has picked are such, "bomb-throwers", that Kissinger, the president of the United States, are urging in some way that there be some balance here and that people knowledgeable about diplomacy not incendiary be brought into this process. And I think that's the unknown factor here and particularly Kissinger, but also I think that Obama has really had an effect on Trump and on his good days. COOPER: But Kayleigh, I mean there are some -- there are a lot of questions about Giuliani, you know, his business ties, what a confirmation process would be like for him. Obviously, Petraeus, I mean, he has his own issues with the classified information. But, you know, for a lot of people, that's a relatively small transgression and he's, you knows, served his country admirably. MCENANY: Absolutely correct. And I think, you know, if I'm president-elect Trump but I'm approaching this, is not about loyalty or not being loyal, what it is, is I want someone who fully believes in my world view. My foreign policy view for this world. I want someone who's going to go to Qatar, who's someone who's going to go to Saudi Arabia and have a firm hand with these countries that have been accused according to the Podesta e-mails of funding ISIS. And I know Mayor Giuliani would do that. I don't know about Governor Romney. I know Mayor Giuliani's view of foreign policy closely approximates that of the president-elect. COOPER: In fact, Governor Romney has spoken very, you know, strongly about Russia in ... MCENANY: Sure. COOPER: ... in past years. You could argue Donald Trump did not ... MCENANY: But if he can put those aside, those disagreements aside and say you are the president-elect, I'm there to implement your view. I would be OK with that and I trust president-elect Trump to make that decision. KINGSTON: And I think he's got a pattern of making tough decisions. He's not afraid of it and he's not afraid of this even public debate, if you will. Think about Ted Cruz somewhat awkward stage ... COOPER: He doesn't like the public debate. KINGSTON: Well, but -- think about Ted Cruz being invited to speak at the convention and Trump knowing that he wasn't going to endorse him at the convention. He has a different kind of candidate. And I think that's what basic ... COOPER: Well, we don't know for sure at the time that he knew that he was going to endorse him, but I mean he certainly figured a way to subvert whatever Ted Cruz said by coming down those stairs. KINGSTON: But let me say this, I've had the honor of speaking at a convention, you are orchestrated to the necktie you wear, to the very second that you get on and off the stage. There are no ... (CROSSTALK) COOPER: Were you at that convention? That it was a little different. KINGSTON: Because it was Donald Trump saying ... COOPER: Right. KINGSTON: ... I want a little ... COOPER: All right, we're going to have more with the panel, in the next break. We're going to take a quick break. Also we'll have the latest on the attack today in the campus of Ohio State University as concerns over terrorism now take center stage. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [20:53:10] COOPER: Again our breaking news on the Trump transition. Vice president-elect Mike Pence says there will be a number of important announcements tomorrow. So he mentioned one of the biggest jobs left to open as Secretary of State, Mitt Romney is a contender, again he's meeting with Trump tomorrow, no secret. Romney and Trump had been bitter rivals. I recently asked Trump's senior adviser, Kellyanne Conway, about their heated history, take a look. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: But -- I mean as you know, president-elect and Governor Trump, as they've traded very personal insults throughout, you know, the campaign. I mean Governor Romney, you know, came out and said a lot of things, Donald Trump as well. In fact, let me just play for our viewers to remind them some of the comments are made. Let me just play the sound. MITT ROMNEY, (R) FORMER GOVERNOR MASSACHUSETTS: Donald Trump is a phony, a fraud. DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT-ELECT OF UNITED STATES: Mitt was a disaster as a candidate. ROMNEY: He's playing the members of the American public for suckers. TRUMP: Romney let us all down. He was a very poor campaigner. ROMNEY: He gets a free ride to the White House and all we get is a lousy hat. TRUMP: Romney choked like a dog. He choked. COOPER: Do you think they could actually work together? KELLYANNE CONWAY, TRUMP FORMER CAMPAIGN MANAGER: I do. And I think what happens with consensus builders and good negotiators and successful businessmen, who know you have to take the counsel of many different people, rivals, allies, is that they find a way to work together, if it's appropriate, Anderson. And look, I think in politics, people look at each other through these blue and red lenses, but businessman like Romney and Trump, they tend to be able to shed those gladiator outfits of blue and red and try to solve problems and come together. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: All right, so that was a while ago. Now listen to what Conway said about Romney this weekend. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) CONWAY: Anumber of people who feel betrayed to think that a Governor Romney would get the most prominent cabinet post after he constituent so far out of his way to hurt Donald Trump, there was the Never-Trump movement and then there was Mitt Romney. He gave speeches against Donald Trump, he attacked his character. (END VIDEO CLIP) [20:55:06] COOPER: All right. Let's continue the conversation with the panel. Kayleigh, I mean do you think Donald Trump could forget all of that about Mitt Romney? MCENANY: Look, I think he could, for the betterment of the country. If he truly feels that Mitt Romney is the most qualified person for the job, then, yes. But what Kellyanne Conway was saying, in the second clip, and I do think it's important, that he would have to assuage the fears of the base. The base is concerned ... COOPER: That Romney would or Trump would? MCENANY: That Trump would, have to assuage the concerns of the base and say, this is the best candidate, and here is why. Because it is odd to see someone who is so very much against Trump, who called him a con man, now all of a sudden become Secretary of State. I think it would take president-elect explaining to this the American people, this is why this is the best choice. COOPER: Monica, do you think it's also possible that it's somebody that we don't -- that's not, you know, Petraeus or Romney or Giuliani? LANGLEY: Well, it could be corker ... COOPER: Right. LANGLEY: ... the -- you know, the senator that's head of the Foreign Relations Committee. He's coming in tomorrow to visit with him. I think it could be. I mean, this is taking a long time. He can't get settled. I was with Donald Trump and Giuliani on his plane when they were traveling. Giuliani worked his butt off. Not only would he go and introduce Trump, he would be on the plane and he would read every one of Hillary Clinton's e-mails and circle things and give it to the speechwriter or the head of policy. I mean he worked so hard. That's why the staff love him. On the other hand, Donald Trump cares about appearances and image and Giuliani is getting a lot of criticism as not having the proper gravidas and that matters. COOPER: Right on the international stage, but also his international businesses ... LANGLEY: And his conflicts of interest. COOPER: Right, the confirmation could be ... LANGLEY: Exactly. I also vet and spent time with Mitt Romney in San Diego in his beach front home and went with him to his grandchildren a few months ago, because his grandchildren are someone who played with him. And he said to me because of these grandchildren I could never vote for Donald Trump, he's against everything I believe in. So we have two men who have been so at each other, now if they can work together, it would be really for the good of the country if they can do that. KINGSTON: I think, though, we're seeing all across the board lots of people who want to work for this administration. There's always that kind of excitement when a new president takes over either party. I understand there's something like 50,000 applications. But I want say these some other names out there, may -- we haven't talk about John Bolton, we haven't talk about Dana Rohrabacher, we haven't talk about Jon Huntsman. And I think he's a guy who can speak Mandarin, he's traveled the world and I think somebody like that would gladly respond to the call and listen to what Mr. Trump is saying. NAVARRO: I think what we're seeing here is a little bit of "The Apprentice" and Miss Universe rolled into one. Let's remember -- no seriously, he does manipulate the media, he loves drama, he loves building up suspense. We are all talking about it and we've been talking about it for 10 days. Let's just hope, you know, they make them do a swimsuit contest, because that could be painful. But anyway. BERNSTEIN: Now speaking of language that would result. NAVARRO: I think what we're seeing is him putting them through public trials and tribulations and seeing, you know, who ends up in the season finale getting that rose. BERNSTEIN: One of the things about Giuliani, that the biggest problem is president incoming has right now are his horrendous conflicts of interest. And there's going to be a lot of attention from Republicans and Democrats and try to end those conflicts, though they probably won't be successful. Giuliani has as many or more. And when you pile those two together, that could be a big negative. NAVARRO: But Carl, Giuliani has a lot of chicks in the Senate ... BERNSTEIN: Yes. NAVARRO: ... whether Republican senators. He has campaign for a lot of them, he's got close relationships, friendships he campaign for McKinney, he campaign -- I can think of so many that he campaigned for that yes, it will be an ugly confirmation hearing, but I think he would get confirmed. COOPER: All right, we will see if any announce tomorrow. In the next hour of "360," the White House confirming to edit President Obama and President-elect Trump to talked a handful of times. What we've learned about their phone calls and the latest on the Trump transition, coming up. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) Police: OSU Attack Possibly Terrorism; President-Elect Falsely Claims Millions Voted Illegally; CA Secy. of State: Allegation of Voter Fraud "Absurd"; Voters on Wisconsin Recount; Pence: "Number of Very Important Announcements Tomorrow"; Trump Works to Save Carrier Jobs, Fulfill Promise; Eichenwald: Trump Hotel Execs Violated U.S. Embargo In 1998. Aired 9-10p ET Aired November 28, 2016 - 21:00 ET THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:01:01] ANDERSON COOPER, CNN ANCHOR: Good evening, a lot of politics to get to in this hour. We begin though with our breaking news, investigators are scrambling tonight to determine if an attack on the campus of Ohio State University was, in fact, a terror attack. In less than two minutes, 11 people were hurt, their attacker killed. The entire campus rattled to its core. Students were ordered to shelter in place. It would be hours before they learned what had happened and who was responsible. As we do on "360" in situations like this, we try not to overuse the attacker's name, it was not give him the attention he might have crave or do we think it's important you know who he is and what else we're learning is authorities right now are continuing to look for clues. Pamela Brown tonight has the latest. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) PAMELA BROWN, CNN JUSTICE CORRESPONDENT: Around 9:52 a.m., chaos erupts in the heart of the campus near buildings for the science and engineering programs. A car jumps a curb, plowing into pedestrians, then the suspect, identified as Abdul Razak Ali Artan jumps out and continues to attack with a knife, slashing people. CRAIG STONE, OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY POLICE: He exits the vehicle and used a butcher knife to start cutting pedestrians. Our officer was on-scene in less than a minute and he ended the situation less than a minute. He engaged the suspect and he eliminated the threat, the suspect is DOA. BROWN: The attacker was an Ohio State Student of Somali descent and a permanent resident of the United States. Police are now searching his home and law enforcement officials say that on Facebook, he complained recently about attacks on Muslims. Investigators say it could be the motive, but they are continuing to investigate. His mother told a community member that he'd been complaining about grades at OSU. He was interviewed at the beginning of the school year by the student newspaper. And spoke of being uncomfortable openly praying and projecting his Muslim faith on campus. KEVIN VASQUEZ, OHIO STATE STUDENT: It's very hectic here right now. There's like 40 cop cars. Everyone's very frantic and all SWAT teams are getting together and cops are still pulling up. BROWN: A text message from the university went out to all students, telling them to shelter in place. A tweet from the university's emergency management department told them to run, hide, fight. WYATT CROSHER, OHIO STATE STUDENT: We did hear like three or four things that would sound like gunshots, and then we heard silence, so we assumed they were gunshots. BROWN: Students barricade their classroom doors in an effort to keep the attacker at bay. One class piled up chairs at the door as law enforcement arrives on scene to try and contain the situation as quickly as possible. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: We have quite a few military men in our class, who actually are all standing by the doors, keeping us safe, so feeling pretty good about that. BROWN: Police say in the end, there was no second suspect and no shots were ever fired by the attacker. Today, investigators are poring through the suspect's communications and belongings seeking motive, but the police said there was no question he meant to do harm. STONE: The only thing that you can say based upon common knowledge is that this was done on purpose, to go over the curb and strike pedestrians and to get out and start striking them with a knife, that was on purpose. (END VIDEO CLIP) COOPER: Pamela, what's the latest on the attacker's social media posts? BROWN: What we have learned, Anderson, that the attacker posted on his Facebook page just before he launched that attack here in Columbus this morning. He went on an anti-American rant, aired grievances about Muslims being killed and in this post that we obtained, he talks about being sick and tired of seeing his fellow Muslim brothers and sisters being killed and tortured everywhere. He warned America to stop interfering with other countries. He talks about not letting people sleep unless America gives peace to the Muslims. And he goes on to say, Anderson, every single Muslim who disapproves of his action is a sleeper cell waiting for a signal. He says, I'm warning you, oh, America. This is just part of what he put in this Facebook post just before he launched the attack. Investigators have been aware of this post for hours. They've been scrutinizing this, as one official I spoke with said this could help determine the motive. It looks early on in the investigation that this could be an act of terrorism. But they continue to look at all angles throughout the social media, talk to friends and family so early in this investigation. Anderson? [21:05:11] COOPER: All right, Pamela thanks very much. Now to politics and the false claim that President-elect Donald Trump has made on Twitter about millions of supposed illegal votes. Jeff Zeleny tonight reports (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) JEFF ZELENY, CNN SENIOR WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT: Donald Trump is showing signs tonight of being a sore winner. The president-elect is suggesting with zero evidence to back up his claim that he won the popular vote. And he's a victim of widespread election fraud. In addition to winning the Electoral College in a landslide, Trump wrote on Twitter, "I won the popular vote, if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally." After repeatedly railing against the system on the campaign trail. DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT-ELECT OF UNITED STATES: It is a rigged system. And be careful with the voting. Be careful with everything. You watch everything, folks. ZELENY: He's now throwing out blatant and baseless allegations on Twitter. "Serious voter fraud in Virginia, New Hampshire and California. So why isn't the media reporting on this? Serious bias, big problem!" Election officials in all three states say Trumps charges are flat out wrong. Trump transition officials have not offered any hard evidence to back up his staggering claims of fraud. Hillary Clinton's lead in the popular vote has climbed to over two million. Despite charging that millions of fraudulent votes were cast nationwide, Trump is actually crying foul over the recount getting underway in Wisconsin. The Wisconsin Elections Commission said today it would start counting nearly three million ballots again at the request of Green Party candidate Jill Stein. She's pledging to put the tab in Wisconsin, even as she pushes for recounts in Michigan and Pennsylvania. Trump swept the three Rust Belt states, turning them red for the first time in more than two decades. A recount is highly unlikely to change the outcome. MICHAEL HAAS, WISCONSIN ELECTION BOARD ADMINISTRATION: This is certainly not Bush v. Gore. ZELENY: Trump, who won Wisconsin by 22,000 votes, called the Wisconsin recount a scam. Mark Thompson, leader of Bipartisan Wisconsin Election Commission, blasted Trump for peddling what he called a conspiracy theory. MARK THOMPSON, CHAIRMAN, WISCONSIN ELECTIONS BOARD: To say that it's not being fair or that people are counting illegal votes, from my advantage point, is an insult to the people that run our elections. ZELENY: The Clinton campaign says there is no evidence of wrongdoing, but still plans to observe the Wisconsin recount. Mark Elias, Clinton's top lawyer, responded on Twitter. "We are getting attack for participating in a recount that we didn't ask for by the man who won the election, but thinks there was massive fraud." (END VIDEO CLIP) ZELENY: Now, all this talk of fraud, but no evidence or facts to back it up. It may be a way to change the subject from something that Republicans close to Trump tell me is bothering him. He lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton, more than two million votes so far. So he's raising suggestions of fraud to muddy the waters. Now, Jill Stein is pledging to request a recount in Michigan before the Wednesday deadline. And in Pennsylvania, all this will be playing out as Trump builds his administration. The election may be over, but the chaos of campaign 2016 clearly is not. Anderson? COOPER: All right Jeff Zeleny, Jeff thanks very much. California's top election official is hitting back at Trump's claim. Alex Padilla tweeted this quote. "It appears that Mr. Trump is troubled by the fact that a growing majority of Americans did not vote for him. His unsubstantiated allegations of voter fraud in California and elsewhere are absurd. His reckless tweets are inappropriate and unbecoming of a president-elect." California Secretary of State Alex Padilla joins us now. Thanks so much for being with us, Secretary Padilla. To your knowledge, is there any evidence whatsoever that point to any kind of significant voter fraud in California? ALEX PADILLA, CALIFORNIA SECRETARY OF STATE: Aabsolutely not, Anderson and I think that's a big part of the problem here. We've heard a lot of these accusations about potential rigging and hacking in several weeks leading up to the election. To be honest, my bigger concern was not just the security of our elections, but that it could have the effect of discouraging people from voting, if they thought that maybe their vote wouldn't count or maybe their vote would not be counted. In California, I'm proud to say, California saw right through that. We had a record high registration going into November 8th. And the look like a historic high turned out as well. COOPER: So why do you think Donald Trump singled California out, I mean along with Virginia and New Hampshire? PADILLA: I think, you know, part to Chris had mentioned he certainly lost California, in a big way. That, imagine, doesn't feel good to him, but I will say look, I am a registered Democrat, part of that I take my day job seriously though. And everything and in the conduct of elections is done professionally and in a very transparent way. For the folks who have complained about the outcome of the results or, you know, the rumors about voter fraud, without any evidence, without any proof, we welcome them in to county election offices, up and down the state on election night to observe the counting of the ballot and since election night, to observe the processing of vote by mail ballots and provisional ballots. [21:09:59] COOPER: You know, some states like, I think, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, they do some sample testing after the election in a number of counties to see, you know, if the voted fact is what is was on election, does California do that? Do you look back at all? PADILLA: Absolutely, we have several layers of security, actually. I mean we have the highest standards for certification of what systems can be used in the elections. We have criteria for Election Day itself. No machines that are used to mark ballots, cast ballots, count ballots, at any point, can be connected to the internet. So it's nearly impossible to systemically hack or rig the election. And yes, after fact, we do require a percentage manual tally, just to make sure that the head count matches up with the machine count, both for the accuracy of the results and the integrity of the results. Election integrity is paramount, we take all accusations of voter fraud very seriously, and to me, that's what was most troublesome of the tweet yesterday. Significant allegations with no proof, no evidence, if you have it, team Trump, bring it. COOPER: But, you know, I mean hacking is one thing, but sort of -- but old voter rolls, or, you know, people who are dead, still on the voter rolls or at the wrong address. I mean it seems like that is an issue around the country? PADILLA: So two things. Number one, in California, we have just recently consolidated 58 independent voter registration databases, county by county, into one centralized statewide voter register database. So we're at the most accurate of our voter roll as we have been in a long, long time. But second, there's always this accusation or allegation of, well, something could happen, something could happen, somebody could vote erroneously but have you. That's very different that somebody actually doing it. So, again if there's anybody that has proof or evidence of voter fraud, we'd love to investigate it, please come forward. But short of that, I think it's irresponsible and frankly dangerous for the president-elect to make these serious allegations via Twitter, no less. COOPER: Secretary Alex Padilla, appreciate you joining us, thanks very much. Coming up, what voters in Wisconsin think about the prospects of a recount in their state set to get underway later this week. And later candidate Donald Trump made keeping jobs moving jobs from Mexico a focal point of the campaign and the Twitter account, can President Trump deliver, we sent Martin Savidge to the Carrier air conditioning plant to find out what workers there are think. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) CHUCK JONES, PRESIDENT, U.S. STEELWORKERS LOCAL 1999: Hey, you know, if you move these jobs to Monterey, Mexico, we're going to take a hard stand on you getting anymore military contracts. MARTIN SAVIDGE, CNN CORRESPONDET: Do you think that would get their attention? JONES: I would think it would get their attention, yet that your talking about this, with a billion -- you know, billions. (COMMERCIAL BREAK) [21:16:10] COOPER: A recount is expected to start later this week in Wisconsin, one of three states. The Green Party candidate Jill Stein is focused on in an effort to take a closer look on presidential vote. Now, in a moment we'll hear from Stein. But first Gary Tuchman spoke to voters in Wisconsin to find out what some of them think about this idea of a recount in Wisconsin. (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) GARY TUCHMAN, CNN NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Florence County, Wisconsin, in the northern tip of the state. MICHAEL PIERCE, VOTED FOR TRUMP: I voted for Donald Trump. TUCHMAN: 72 percent of voters here selected Trump, his number one county on Wisconsin. And then Menominee County not too far away. SHAWNA PEREZ, VOTED FOR CLINTON: I voted for Hillary. TUCHMAN: 78 percent for Clinton, her number one county in Wisconsin. Two rural places, with very different viewpoints of the upcoming Wisconsin recount. Florence County, Trump, voter, Michael Pierce. PIERCE: Hillary is -- she's a cry baby, everybody that didn't get their way is going to cry and whine about something. TUCHMAN: Menominee County Clinton voter, Shawna Perez. So do you have a thought that Hillary Clinton could still win here in the state of Wisconsin? PEREZ: There's always hope. And I hope so. TUCHMAN: Menominee County's residents are mostly Native Americans, members of the Menominee Tribe. At the College of Menominee Nation, strong support of the recount combines with hard feelings about the elections. GARY BOYD, VOTED FOR CLINTON: The Russians might have interfered with the electronic votes that were cast by the public -- American public. TUCHMAN: And you think they would have done that in favor of Donald Trump? BOYD: Yes, because Donald Trump is promoting support for the reinvigoration of the Soviet Empire. That's what I feel. LISA PETERS, VOTED FOR CLINTON: If there was a mistake, they should find it. TUCHMAN: Are you suspicious that there might have been a mistake? PETERS: Well, why would there be a recount? Today, I am here to talk about three crucial words that should be at the center of our foreign policy: Peace Through Strength. We want to achieve a stable, peaceful world with less conflict and more common ground. I am proposing a new foreign policy focused on advancing America’s core national interests, promoting regional stability, and producing an easing of tensions in the world. This will require rethinking the failed policies of the past. We can make new friends, rebuild old alliances, and bring new allies into the fold. I’m proud to have the support of warfighting generals, active duty military, and the top experts who know both how to win – and how to avoid the endless wars we are caught in now. Just yesterday, 88 top Generals and Admirals endorsed my campaign. In a Trump Administration, our actions in the Middle East will be tempered by realism. The current strategy of toppling regimes, with no plan for what to do the day after, only produces power vacuums that are filled by terrorists. Gradual reform, not sudden and radical change, should be our guiding objective in that region. We should work with any country that shares our goal of destroying ISIS and defeating Radical Islamic terrorism, and form new friendships and partnerships based on this mission. We now have an Administration, and a former Secretary of State, who refuse to say Radical Islamic Terrorism. Immediately after taking office, I will ask my generals to present to me a plan within 30 days to defeat and destroy ISIS. This will require military warfare, but also cyber warfare, financial warfare, and ideological warfare – as I laid out in my speech on defeating Radical Islamic terrorism several weeks ago. Instead of an apology tour, I will proudly promote our system of government and our way of life as the best in the world – just like we did in our campaign against communism during the Cold War. We will show the whole world how proud we are to be American. At the same time, immigration security is a vital part of our national security. We only want to admit people to our country who will support our values and love our people. These are the pillars of a sound national security strategy. Unlike my opponent, my foreign policy will emphasize diplomacy, not destruction. Hillary Clinton’s legacy in Iraq, Libya, and Syria has produced only turmoil and suffering. Her destructive policies have displaced millions of people, then she has invited the refugees into the West with no plan to screen them. Including Veteran healthcare costs, the price of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan could total $6 trillion, according to a report in the Washington Examiner. Yet, after all this money spent and lives lost, Clinton’s policies as Secretary of State have left the Middle East in more disarray than ever before. Meanwhile, China has grown more aggressive, and North Korea more dangerous and belligerent. Russia has defied this Administration at every turn. Putin has no respect for President Obama or Hillary Clinton. Sometimes it has seemed like there wasn’t a country in the Middle East that Hillary Clinton didn’t want to invade, intervene or topple. She is trigger-happy and unstable when it comes to war. Hillary Clinton is just reckless – so reckless, in fact, she put her emails on an illegal server that our enemies could easily hack. Then Clinton’s team used a technology called bleachbit to acid wash her emails. They even took a hammer to some of her 13 phones, to cover her tracks and obstruct justice. These email records were destroyed after she received a subpoena to turn them over. In the FBI report, she claimed she couldn’t recall important information on 39 occasions. She can’t even remember whether she was trained in classified information, and said she didn’t even know the letter “C” means confidential. If she can’t remember such crucial events and information, she is unfit to be Commander-in-Chief. Her conduct is simply disqualifying. She talks about her experience, but Hillary Clinton’s only foreign policy experience is “failure.” Everywhere she got involved, things got worse. Let’s look back at the Middle East at the very beginning of 2009, before Hillary Clinton was sworn-in. Libya was stable. Syria was under control. Egypt was ruled by a secular President and an ally of the United States. Iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence. The group that would become what we now call ISIS was close to being extinguished. Iran was being choked off by economic sanctions. Fast-forward to today. What have the decisions of Obama-Clinton produced? Libya is in ruins, our ambassador and three other brave Americans are dead, and ISIS has gained a new base of operations. Syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war. ISIS controls large portions of territory. A refugee crisis now threatens Europe and the United States. And hundreds of thousands are dead. In Egypt, terrorists have gained a foothold in the Sinai desert, near the Suez Canal, one of the most essential waterways in the world. Iraq is in chaos, and ISIS is on the loose. ISIS has spread across the Middle East, and into the West. Iran, the world’s largest state sponsor of terrorism, is now flush with $150 billion dollars in cash released by the United States – plus another $1.7 billion dollars in cash ransom payments. In other words, our country was blackmailed and extorted into paying this unheard-of amount of money. Worst of all, the Nuclear deal puts Iran, the number one state sponsor of Radical Islamic terrorism, on a path to nuclear weapons. This is Hillary Clinton’s foreign policy legacy. But that’s not all. President Obama and Hillary Clinton have also overseen deep cuts in our military, which only invite more aggression from our adversaries. History shows that when America is not prepared is when the danger is greatest. We want to deter, avoid and prevent conflict through our unquestioned military strength. Under Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, defense spending is on track to fall to its lowest level as a share of the economy since the end of World War II. We currently have the smallest Army since 1940. The Navy is among the smallest it has been since 1915. And the Air Force is the smallest it has been since 1947. When Ronald Reagan left office, our Navy had 592 ships. When Barack Obama took office, it had 285 ships. Today, the Navy has just 276 ships. The average Air Force aircraft is 27 years-old. We have 2nd generation B-52 bombers – their fathers flew the same plane. Our Army has been shrinking rapidly, from 553,000 soldiers in 2009 to just 479,000 today. In 2009, our Marine Corps had 202,000 active Marines. Today, it’s just 182,000. Our ship count is below the minimum of 308 that the Navy says is needed to execute its current missions. President Obama plans to reduce the Army to 450,000 troops—which would hamstring our ability to defend the United States. It takes 22 years on average to field a major new weapons system. In 2010, the US spent $554 billion on non-war base defense spending. In the current year, we are spending $548 billion – a cut of 10% in real inflation-adjusted dollars. This reduction was done through what is known as the sequester, or automatic defense budget cuts. Under the budget agreement, defense took half of the cuts – even though it makes up only one-sixth of the budget. As soon as I take office, I will ask Congress to fully eliminate the defense sequester and will submit a new budget to rebuild our military. This will increase certainty in the defense community as to funding, and will allow military leaders to plan for our future defense needs. As part of removing the defense sequester, I will ask Congress to fully offset the costs of increased military spending. In the process, we will make government leaner and more responsive to the public. I will ask that savings be accomplished through common sense reforms that eliminate government waste and budget gimmicks – and that protect hard-earned benefits for Americans. Government-wide, improper government payments are estimated to exceed $135 billion per year, and the amount of unpaid taxes is estimated to be as high as $385 billion. We can also reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy through responsible workforce attrition – that is, when employees retire, they can be replaced by a smaller number of new employees. We can also stop funding programs that are not authorized in law. Congress spent $320 billion last year on 256 expired laws. Removing just 5 percent of that will reduce spending by almost $200 billion over 10 years. The military will not be exempt either – the military bureaucracy will have to be trimmed as well. Early in my term, I will also be requesting that all NATO nations promptly pay their bills, which many are not doing right now. Only 5 NATO countries, including the United States, are currently meeting the minimum requirement to spend 2% of GDP on defense. Additionally, I will be respectfully asking countries such as Germany, Japan, South Korea and Saudi Arabia to pay more for the tremendous security we provide them. Finally, we will have at our disposal additional revenues from unleashing American energy. The Institute for Energy Research cites a "short-run" figure of as much as $36 billion annually from increased energy production. Using these new funds, I will ask my Secretary of Defense to propose a new defense budget to meet the following long-term goals: We will build an active Army of around 540,000, as the Army’s chief of staff has said he needs. We now have only 31 Brigade Combat Teams, or 490,000 troops, and only one-third of combat teams are considered combat-ready. We will build a Marine Corps based on 36 battalions, which the Heritage Foundation notes is the minimum needed to deal with major contingencies – we have 23 now. We will build a Navy of 350 surface ships and submarines, as recommended by the bipartisan National Defense Panel – we have 276 ships now. And we will build an Air Force of at least 1,200 fighter aircraft, which the Heritage Foundation has shown to be needed to execute current missions – we have 1,113 now. We will also seek to develop a state of the art missile defense system. Under Obama-Clinton, our ballistic missile defense capability has been degraded at the very moment the US and its allies are facing a heightened missile threat from states like Iran and North Korea. As these potential adversaries grow their missile programs, US military facilities in Asia and the Middle East, as well as our allies, are increasingly in range, with the United States homeland also potentially threatened. We propose to rebuild the key tools of missile defense, starting with the Navy cruisers that are the foundation of our missile defense capabilities in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. The Obama-Clinton administration tried repeatedly to remove our cruisers from service, then refused to modernize these aging ships. We will start by modernizing our cruisers to provide the Ballistic Missile Defense capability our nation needs; this will cost around $220 million per modernization as we seek to modernize a significant portion of these 22 ships. As we expand our Navy toward the goal of 350 ships, we will also procure additional modern destroyers that are designed to handle the missile defense mission in the coming years. Accomplishing this military rebuild will be a fifty-state effort —every state in the union will be able to take part in rebuilding our military and developing the technologies oftomorrow. In addition, we will improve the Department of Defense’s cyber capabilities. Hillary Clinton has taught us all how vulnerable we are to cyber hacking. Which is why one of the first things we must do is to enforce all classification rules, and enforce all laws relating to the handling of classified information. Hillary Clinton put her emails on a secret server to cover-up her pay-for-play scandals at the State Department. Nothing threatens the integrity of our Democracy more than when government officials put their public office up for sale. We will also make it a priority to develop defensive and offensive cyber capabilities at our U.S. Cyber Command, and recruit the best and brightest Americans. One of my first directives after taking office will be asking the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and all relevant federal departments, to conduct a thorough review of United States cyber defenses and identify all vulnerabilities – in our power grid, our communications systems, and all vital infrastructure. I will then ask for a plan to immediately protect those vulnerabilities. At the same time, we will invest heavily in offensive cyber capabilities to disrupt our enemies, including terrorists who rely heavily on internet communications. These new investments in cybersecurity, and the modernization of our military, will spur substantial new job creation in the private sector and help create the jobs and technologies of tomorrow. America must be the world’s dominant technological powerhouse of the 21st century, and young Americans – including in our inner cities – should get these new jobs. We must also ensure that we have the best medical care, education and support for our military service members and their families – both when they serve, and when they return to civilian life. Our debt to our men and women in uniform is eternal. To all those who have served this nation, I say: I will never let you down. We will protect those who protect us. And we will follow their example of unity. We will work across all racial and income lines to create One American Nation. Together, we will have one great American future. We will be one people, under one God, saluting one American flag. America will be a prosperous, generous and inclusive society. We will discard the failed policies and division of the past, and embrace true American change to rebuild our economy, rebuild our inner cities, and rebuild our country. We Will Bring Back Our Jobs. We Will Make America Strong Again. We Will Make America Safe Again. And We Will Make America Great Again. Friday 14 October 2016 18.32 BST View more sharing options This article is 1 month old Shares 25,926 My goodness! You guys are fired up! Well, let me just say hello everyone. I am so thrilled to be here with you all today in New Hampshire. This is like home to me, and this day – thank you for a beautiful fall day. You just ordered this day up for me, didn’t you? It’s great to be here. Let me start by thanking your fabulous governor, your next US senator, Maggie Hassan. I want to thank her for that lovely introduction. I also want to recognize your Congresswoman Annie McKlane Kuster, who’s a dear, dear friend. Your soon-to-be congresswoman once again, Carol Shea Porter – all of whom have been just terrific friends to us. And your executive council and candidate for governor, Colin Van Ostern. And, of course, thanks to all of you for taking the time to be here today. Audience member: We love you! Trump faces new sexual misconduct claims from Apprentice contestant – as it happened Follow along for the latest updates from the trail, as more women speak out against Trump, while President Obama appears in Cleveland for Clinton Read more Thanks so much. That’s very sweet of you. I love you guys too. I can’t believe it’s just a few weeks before election day, as we come together to support the next president and vice-president of the United States, Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine! And New Hampshire is going to be important, as always. So I’m going to get a little serious here, because I think we can all agree that this has been a rough week in an already rough election. This week has been particularly interesting for me personally because it has been a week of profound contrast. See, on Tuesday, at the White House, we celebrated the International Day of the Girl and Let Girls Learn, and it was a wonderful celebration. It was the last event that I’m going to be doing as first lady for Let Girls Learn. And I had the pleasure of spending hours talking to some of the most amazing young women you will ever meet, young girls here in the US and all around the world. And we talked about their hopes and their dreams. We talked about their aspirations. See, because many of these girls have faced unthinkable obstacles just to attend school, jeopardizing their personal safety, their freedom, risking the rejection of their families and communities. So I thought it would be important to remind these young women how valuable and precious they are. I wanted them to understand that the measure of any society is how it treats its women and girls. And I told them that they deserve to be treated with dignity and respect, and I told them that they should disregard anyone who demeans or devalues them, and that they should make their voices heard in the world. And I walked away feeling so inspired, just like I’m inspired by all the young people here – and I was so uplifted by these girls. That was Tuesday. And now, here I am, out on the campaign trail in an election where we have consistently been hearing hurtful, hateful language about women – language that has been painful for so many of us, not just as women, but as parents trying to protect our children and raise them to be caring, respectful adults, and as citizens who think that our nation’s leaders should meet basic standards of human decency. The fact is that in this election, we have a candidate for president of the United States who, over the course of his lifetime and the course of this campaign, has said things about women that are so shocking, so demeaning that I simply will not repeat anything here today. And last week, we saw this candidate actually bragging about sexually assaulting women. And I can’t believe that I’m saying that a candidate for president of the United States has bragged about sexually assaulting women. And I have to tell you that I can’t stop thinking about this. It has shaken me to my core in a way that I couldn’t have predicted. So while I’d love nothing more than to pretend like this isn’t happening, and to come out here and do my normal campaign speech, it would be dishonest and disingenuous of me to just move on to the next thing like this was all just a bad dream. This is not something that we can ignore. It’s not something we can just sweep under the rug as just another disturbing footnote in a sad election season. Because this was not just a “lewd conversation”. This wasn’t just locker-room banter. This was a powerful individual speaking freely and openly about sexually predatory behavior, and actually bragging about kissing and groping women, using language so obscene that many of us were worried about our children hearing it when we turn on the TV. And to make matters worse, it now seems very clear that this isn’t an isolated incident. It’s one of countless examples of how he has treated women his whole life. And I have to tell you that I listen to all of this and I feel it so personally, and I’m sure that many of you do too, particularly the women. The shameful comments about our bodies. The disrespect of our ambitions and intellect. The belief that you can do anything you want to a woman. It is cruel. It’s frightening. And the truth is, it hurts. It hurts. It’s like that sick, sinking feeling you get when you’re walking down the street minding your own business and some guy yells out vulgar words about your body. Or when you see that guy at work that stands just a little too close, stares a little too long, and makes you feel uncomfortable in your own skin. It’s that feeling of terror and violation that too many women have felt when someone has grabbed them, or forced himself on them and they’ve said no but he didn’t listen – something that we know happens on college campuses and countless other places every single day. It reminds us of stories we heard from our mothers and grandmothers about how, back in their day, the boss could say and do whatever he pleased to the women in the office, and even though they worked so hard, jumped over every hurdle to prove themselves, it was never enough. We thought all of that was ancient history, didn’t we? And so many have worked for so many years to end this kind of violence and abuse and disrespect, but here we are in 2016 and we’re hearing these exact same things every day on the campaign trail. We are drowning in it. And all of us are doing what women have always done: we’re trying to keep our heads above water, just trying to get through it, trying to pretend like this doesn’t really bother us maybe because we think that admitting how much it hurts makes us as women look weak. Maybe we’re afraid to be that vulnerable. Maybe we’ve grown accustomed to swallowing these emotions and staying quiet, because we’ve seen that people often won’t take our word over his. Or maybe we don’t want to believe that there are still people out there who think so little of us as women. Too many are treating this as just another day’s headline, as if our outrage is overblown or unwarranted, as if this is normal, just politics as usual. But, New Hampshire, be clear: this is not normal. This is not politics as usual. This is disgraceful. It is intolerable. And it doesn’t matter what party you belong to – Democrat, Republican, independent – no woman deserves to be treated this way. None of us deserves this kind of abuse. And I know it’s a campaign, but this isn’t about politics. It’s about basic human decency. It’s about right and wrong. And we simply cannot endure this, or expose our children to this any – not for another minute, and let alone for four years. Now is the time for all of us to stand up and say enough is enough. This has got to stop right now. Because consider this: if all of this is painful to us as grown women, what do you think this is doing to our children? What message are our little girls hearing about who they should look like, how they should act? What lessons are they learning about their value as professionals, as human beings, about their dreams and aspirations? And how is this affecting men and boys in this country? Because I can tell you that the men in my life do not talk about women like this. And I know that my family is not unusual. And to dismiss this as everyday locker-room talk is an insult to decent men everywhere. The men that you and I know don’t treat women this way. They are loving fathers who are sickened by the thought of their daughters being exposed to this kind of vicious language about women. They are husbands and brothers and sons who don’t tolerate women being treated and demeaned and disrespected. And like us, these men are worried about the impact this election is having on our boys who are looking for role models of what it means to be a man. In fact, someone recently told me a story about their six-year-old son who one day was watching the news – they were watching the news together. And the little boy, out of the blue, said, “I think Hillary Clinton will be president.” And his mom said, “Well, why do you say that?” And this little six-year-old said, “Because the other guy called someone a piggy and,” he said, “You cannot be president if you call someone a piggy.” So even a six-year-old knows better. A six-year-old knows that this is not how adults behave. This is not how decent human beings behave. And this is certainly not how someone who wants to be president of the United States behaves. Because let’s be very clear: strong men – men who are truly role models – don’t need to put down women to make themselves feel powerful. People who are truly strong lift others up. People who are truly powerful bring others together. And that is what we need in our next president. We need someone who is a uniting force in this country. We need someone who will heal the wounds that divide us, someone who truly cares about us and our children, someone with strength and compassion to lead this country forward. And let me tell you, I’m here today because I believe with all of my heart that Hillary Clinton will be that president. See, we know that Hillary is the right person for the job because we’ve seen her character and commitment not just in this campaign, but over the course of her entire life. The fact is that Hillary embodies so many of the values that we try so hard to teach our young people. We tell our young people “work hard in school, get a good education”. We encourage them to use that education to help others – which is exactly what Hillary did with her college and law degrees, advocating for kids with disabilities, fighting for children’s healthcare as first lady, affordable childcare in the Senate. We teach our kids the value of being a team player, which is what Hillary exemplified when she lost the 2008 election and actually agreed to work for her opponent as our secretary of state – earning sky-high approval ratings serving her country once again. We also teach our kids that you don’t take shortcuts in life, and you strive for meaningful success in whatever job you do. Well, Hillary has been a lawyer, a law professor, first lady of Arkansas, first lady of the United States, a US senator, secretary of state. And she has been successful in every role, gaining more experience and exposure to the presidency than any candidate in our lifetime – more than Barack, more than Bill. And, yes, she happens to be a woman. And finally, we teach our kids that when you hit challenges in life, you don’t give up, you stick with it. Well, during her four years as secretary of state alone, Hillary has faced her share of challenges. She’s traveled to 112 countries, negotiated a ceasefire, a peace agreement, a release of dissidents. She spent 11 hours testifying before a congressional committee. We know that when things get tough, Hillary doesn’t complain. She doesn’t blame others. She doesn’t abandon ship for something easier. No, Hillary Clinton has never quit on anything in her life. So in Hillary, we have a candidate who has dedicated her life to public service, someone who has waited her turn and helped out while waiting. She is an outstanding mother. She has raised a phenomenal young woman. She is a loving, loyal wife. She’s a devoted daughter who cared for her mother until her final days. And if any of us had raised a daughter like Hillary Clinton, we would be so proud. We would be proud. And regardless of who her opponent might be, no one could be more qualified for this job than Hillary – no one. And in this election, if we turn away from her, if we just stand by and allow her opponent to be elected, then what are we teaching our children about the values they should hold, about the kind of life they should lead? What are we saying? In our hearts, we all know that if we let Hillary’s opponent win this election, then we are sending a clear message to our kids that everything they’re seeing and hearing is perfectly OK. We are validating it. We are endorsing it. We’re telling our sons that it’s OK to humiliate women. We’re telling our daughters that this is how they deserve to be treated. We’re telling all our kids that bigotry and bullying are perfectly acceptable in the leader of their country. Is that what we want for our children? And remember, we won’t just be setting a bad example for our kids, but for our entire world. Because for so long, America has been a model for countries across the globe, pushing them to educate their girls, insisting that they give more rights to their women. But if we have a president who routinely degrades women, who brags about sexually assaulting women, then how can we maintain our moral authority in the world? How can we continue to be a beacon of freedom and justice and human dignity? Well, fortunately, New Hampshire, here’s the beauty: we have everything we need to stop this madness. You see, while our mothers and grandmothers were often powerless to change their circumstances, today, we as women have all the power we need to determine the outcome of this election. We have knowledge. We have a voice. We have a vote. And on November the 8th, we as women, we as Americans, we as decent human beings can come together and declare that enough is enough, and we do not tolerate this kind of behavior in this country. Remember this: in 2012, women’s votes were the difference between Barack winning and losing in key swing states, including right here in New Hampshire. So for anyone who might be thinking that your one vote doesn’t really matter, or that one person can’t really make a difference, consider this: back in 2012, Barack won New Hampshire by about 40,000 votes, which sounds like a lot. But when you break that number down, the difference between winning and losing this state was only 66 votes per precinct. Just take that in. If 66 people in each precinct had gone the other way, Barack would have lost. So each of you right here today could help swing an entire precinct and win this election for Hillary just by getting yourselves, your families, and your friends and neighbors out to vote. You can do it right here. But you could also help swing an entire precinct for Hillary’s opponent with a protest vote or by staying home out of frustration. Because here’s the truth: either Hillary Clinton or her opponent will be elected president this year. And if you vote for someone other than Hillary, or if you don’t vote at all, then you are helping to elect her opponent. And just think about how you will feel if that happens. Imagine waking up on November the 9th and looking into the eyes of your daughter or son, or looking into your own eyes as you stare into the mirror. Imagine how you’ll feel if you stayed home, or if you didn’t do everything possible to elect Hillary. We simply cannot let that happen. We cannot allow ourselves to be so disgusted that we just shut off the TV and walk away. And we can’t just sit around wringing our hands. Now, we need to recover from our shock and depression and do what women have always done in this country. We need you to roll up your sleeves. We need to get to work. Because remember this: When they go low, we go … Audience: High! Yes, we do. And voting ourselves is a great start, but we also have to step up and start organizing. So we need you to make calls and knock on doors and get folks to the polls on election day and sign up to volunteer with one of the Hillary campaign folks who are here today just waiting for you to step up. And, young people and not-so-young people, get on social media. Share your own story of why this election matters, why it should matter for all people of conscience in this country. There is so much at stake in this election. See, the choice you make November 8 could determine whether we have a president who treats people with respect – or not. A president who will fight for kids, for good schools, for good jobs for our families – or not. A president who thinks that women deserve the right to make our own choices about our bodies and our health – or not. That’s just a little bit of what’s at stake. So we cannot afford to be tired or turned off. And we cannot afford to stay home on election day. Because on November the 8th, we have the power to show our children that America’s greatness comes from recognizing the innate dignity and worth of all our people. On November the 8th, we can show our children that this country is big enough to have a place for us all – men and women, folks of every background and walk of life – and that each of us is a precious part of this great American story, and we are always stronger together. On November 8, we can show our children that here in America, we reject hatred and fear and in difficult times, we don’t discard our highest ideals. No, we rise up to meet them. We rise up to perfect our union. We rise up to defend our blessings of liberty. We rise up to embody the values of equality and opportunity and sacrifice that have always made this country the greatest nation on Earth. That is who we are. And don’t ever let anyone tell you differently. Hope is important. Hope is important for our young people. And we deserve a president who can see those truths in us – a president who can bring us together and bring out the very best in us. Hillary Clinton will be that president. So for the next 26 days, we need to do everything we can to help her and Tim Kaine win this election. I know I’m going to be doing it. Are you with me? Are you all with me? You ready to roll up your sleeves? Get to work knocking on doors? All right, let’s get to work. Thank you all. God bless. This transcript was released by the White House Office of the First Lady